Concise Textbooks 

of 

Forensic Medicine 

Toxicology 





















CONCISE TEXTBOOK OF 
FORENSIC MEDICINE AND TOXICOLOGY 

Third Edition 


Sharma-Prelims.p65 


8/21/07, 12:08 PM 


















Sharma-Prelims.p65 


2 


8/21/07, 12:08 PM 



CONCISE TEXTBOOK OF 
FORENSIC MEDICINE AND TOXICOLOGY 

Third Edition 


Prof. R. K. Sharma 

MBBS, (AIIMS) MD, (AIIMS) FIAMLE, MISCEH, MIMA 
Former Head, 

Department of Forensic Medicine 
All India Institute of Medical Sciences 
New Delhi 

Dean (R&D), Saraswathi Institute of Medical Sciences, 
Ghaziabad, (U.P.) 

President, Indian Association of Medico-Legal Experts, 
Editor, Indian Journal of Forensic Medicine & Toxicology, 
Editor, Medico-Legal Update 
E-mail: rksharmal@gmail.com 



Global Education Consultants 

Aster-06/603, Supertech Emerald Court, Sector - 93 A 
Expressway, Noida- 201 304, Uttar Pradesh 
Tel.: 0120-4248457 • Mobile: 09891098542 
E-mail: rksharma1@gmail.com 


Sharma-Prelims.p65 


3 


8/21/07, 12:08 PM 



















Concise Textbook of Forensic Medicine and Toxicology, 3/e 

RK Sharma 

First Edition 2005 
Second Edition 2008 
Third Edition 2011 

All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval 
system, or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, 
recording or otherwise, without the prior permission of the publishers. 

ISBN: 978-81-921050-0-0 

Medical knowledge is constantly changing. As new information becomes available, changes 
in treatment, procedures, equipment and the use of drugs become necessary. The authors, 
editors, contributors and the publisher have, as far as it is possible, taken care to ensure that 
the information given in this text is accurate and up-to-date. However, readers are strongly 
advised to confirm that the information, especially with regard to drug dose/usage, complies 
with current legislation and standards of practice. 

Price Rs. 320/- 

Published by Global Education Consultants, 

Aster-06/603, Supertech Emerald Court, Sector - 93 A 
Expressway, Noida- 201 304, Uttar Pradesh 
Tel.: 0120-4248457 • Mobile: 09891098542 
E-mail: rksharmal@gmail.com 


Printed and bound at Process & Spot, C-112/3, Naraina Industrial Area, Phase-I, 
New Delhi 110 028 


Sharma-Prelims.p65 


4 


8/21/07, 12:08 PM 


















Sharma-Prelims.p65 


To 

All departed souls 

on whose bodies we learnt Forensic Medicine 


5 


8/21/07, 12:08 PM 


















Sharma-Prelims.p65 


6 


8/21/07, 12:08 PM 



Preface to theThird Edition 


I am happy that undergraduate students of Forensic Medicine and Toxicology have immensely 
appreciated the second edition of this book. The medical fraternity teaching Forensic Medicine 
and Toxicology has also welcomed the second edition of the book. Both students and teachers 
generously sent their comments / suggestions for improving the book. So, I felt the need to 
thoroughly revise the book in light of their comments and suggestions. The third edition 
of the book is thus in your hands. 

We are aware that medical knowledge is evolving rapidly, hence some parts of the book 
needed to be revised and updated incorporating recent developments. A new chapter. Recent 
Advances in Crime Detection featuring new concepts like lie detector test, narco-analysis, 
brain mapping, and hypnosis and voice stress test has been added. The section on the 
techniques of collecting samples for DNA fingerprinting in living and dead cases as also the 
chapters. Insanity and Forensic Psychiatry and Sexual Offences have been thoroughly revised 
and updated. More photographs have been added and new tables have been inserted in 
some chapters with the understanding that these would facilitate comprehension of critical 
concepts and enhance retention of information. It is hoped that this endeavour would help 
the students to perform better in examinations. A new appendix on toxic agents has been 
included which would be useful in the study of toxicology. 

I sincerely thank all my students and colleagues for their frank comments to enhance the 
value of the book. I am aware that perfection cannot be achieved in one or two attempts, it 
requires more efforts. I, therefore, request my students and colleagues to continue sending 
their comments and suggestions just as they did for this edition. 

I hope the book would serve the purpose of students more effectively now. 

New Delhi R.K. Sharma 


Sharma-Prelims.p65 


7 


8/21/07, 12:08 PM 


















Sharma-Prelims.p65 


8 


8/21/07, 12:08 PM 



Preface to the First Edition 


During my undergraduate days, I felt the lack of a good short textbook of forensic medicine 
which would be useful in revising the curriculum at quicker pace at the time of examinations, 
as we were burdened with other subjects too. When I joined as a faculty member, I saw my 
students facing the same problem. To overcome this problem, the idea of writing the present 
book took shape in my mind. 

This book has been written keeping in view needs of undergraduate students and it 
covers the whole curriculum as prescribed by Medical Council of India. I hope it would also 
be useful for students pursuing carrers in a ayurvedic, homoeopathic, unani and siddha 
systems of medicine. This book contains 40 chapters which are based on the lecture schedule 
as followed in most of the medical colleges. New concepts like cloning, euthanasia, date 
rape, DNA fingerprinting have also been added. Toxicology has been revised according to 
latest clinical practice. 

Critical comments and suggestions to improve this book are welcome from all, especially 
students and residents. 

I would thank my childhood friends Umashanker Sharma, Ved Prakash Jindal, Dr. Vinod 
Kumar Jain and Harprit Singh for their moral support. My departmental colleagues especially 
Dr. D.N. Bhardwaj, Additional Professor and Dr. Sudhir Kumar Gupta, Assistant Professor 
who are more of friends have encouraged me at all levels to complete this work. 

I would like to thank the Elsevier team especially Mr. Rajiv Banerji, Tanweer Ahmad, 
Ritesh Bhutani. 

Last, but not the least, my grateful thanks and appreciation to my family which suffered 
silently while I was physically and mentally preoccupied with the book for two years. 

New Delhi R.K. Sharma 


Sharma-Prelims.p65 


9 


8/21/07, 12:08 PM 


















Sharma-Prelims.p65 


10 


8/21/07, 12:08 PM 



Contents 


Preface to the Third Edition vii 

Preface to the First Edition ix 

Section 1: FORENSIC MEDICINE 

1. Definition and History of Forensic Medicine 3 

2. Legal Procedures 5 

3. Identification 11 

4. Post-mortem Examination 22 

5. Examination of Decomposed and Mutilated Bodies, Skeletal Remains, 

and Exhumation 28 

6. Examination of Biological Stains and Hair 32 

7. Medico-legal Aspects of Death 38 

8. Post-mortem Artefacts 52 

9. Asphyxial Deaths 54 

10. Death from Starvation, Cold and Heat 65 

11. Injuries from Bums, Scalds, Lightning and Electricity 69 

12. Injuries by Mechanical Violence 76 

13. Fire-arm Injuries 81 

14. Medico-legal Aspects of Wounds 92 

15. Regional Injuries 103 

16. Traffic Injuries 109 

17. Impotence, Sterility and Artificial Insemination 111 

18. Virginity, Pregnancy and Delivery 117 

19. Sexual Offences 124 

20. Legitimacy and Medico-legal Aspects of Marriage Annulment 135 

21. Infanticide 138 

22. Abortion and Medical Termination of Pregnancy 144 

23. Insanity and Forensic Psychiatry 150 

24. Miscellaneous Topics 162 

25. Law in Relation to Medical Practice: Part I 178 

26. Law in Relation to Medical Practice: Part II 216 

27. Recent Advances in Crime Detection 222 

Forensic Slides 


Sharma-Prelims.p65 


11 


8/21/07, 12:08 PM 




















xii Contents 


Section 2: TOXICOLOGY 

28. Medico-legal Aspects of Poisons 229 

29. Corrosive Poisoning 237 

30. Irritant Poisons—Vegetable Poisons 245 

31. Irritant Poisons—Non-metallic Poisons (Inorganic) 252 

32. Irritant Poisons—Metallic Poisons (Inorganic) 259 

33. Irritant Poisons—Animal Poisons 275 

34. Irritant Poisons—Mechanical Poisons 283 

35. Neurotic Poisons—Somniferous Poisons 285 

36. Cerebral Poisons—Inebriant Poisons 289 

37. Cerebral Poisons—Deliriant Poisons 299 

38. Spinal Poisons 306 

39. Cardiac Poisons 310 

40. Asphyxiants (Irrespirable Gases) 317 

41. Food Poisoning 322 

APPENDICES 

Common Features of Some Toxic Agents 329 

Relevant Sections of Law for Medical Practice 332 


Sharma-Prelims.p65 


12 


8/21/07, 12:08 PM 




















Section 1 

FORENSIC MEDICINE 


CFMT-01 (3rd Proof).p65 


1 


8/12/07, 9:24 AM 



















CFMT-01 (3rd Proof).p65 


2 


8/12/07, 9:24 AM 



CHAPTER 

Definition and History of Forensic 
Medicine 


DEFINITIONS 

The specialty of Forensic Medicine is known by 
various names like Forensic Medicine, Legal 
Medicine, Medical Jurisprudence and State 
Medicine, etc. Although all the names carry 
different meanings they are related to each other. 

The word “Forensic” means “of court of law”. 
Forensic Medicine is defined as application of 
medical knowledge in the administration of justice. 

Medical Jurisprudence deals with the legal 
aspects of medical practice and knowledge. It 
brings doctors in contact with laws. 

State Medicine is application of medical 
knowledge in prevention of diseases. It defines the 
duty of a doctor in relation to notification of all 
births, deaths, notifiable diseases and food 
poisoning. It deals with the legal mandatory duties 
of medical practitioners and personnel. 

HISTORY OF FORENSIC MEDICINE 

The history of Forensic Medicine is quite old. 
Documents related to medico-legal work have been 
found dating back to 4000-3999 B.C. in Egypt, 
Sumer, Babylon, India and China. A document 
dated around 3000 B.C. has been found in China 
that describes poison. Imhotep (2730-2900 B.C.) 
is considered as the first medico-legal expert. He 
was the personal physician and Chief Justice to the 


King of Egypt. Some of the important landmarks 
in this context are as follows: 

1. Code of Hummurabi of Babylon (2000- 
1000 B.C.) is the oldest medico-legal code 
given by King of Babylon in 2200 B.C. It 
describes punishment for medical 
practitioners in case of improper treatment. 

2. Code of the Hittite (1400 B.C.) describes 
compensation for personal injuries 
sustained. 

3. Roman Law (451 B.C.) contained a lot of 
provisions related to medico-legal matters. 

4. Hippocrates (460-377 B.C.) described 
lethality of wounds, medical ethics, sudden 
deaths, etc. 

Around the beginning of the Christian Era, 
many public laws relating to public health, sexual 
matters and eugenics were made in India which 
are popularly known as laws of Manu. 

5. Justinian Code (A.D. 529-564) described 
penalties for medical practice and principles 
of regulation of medical profession. 

6. The Barbarian Statute described the role 
of medical experts in evaluating injuries. 

The first Medico-legal autopsy was conducted 
by Bartolumeo De Varignana in A.D. 1302 in 
Bologna, Italy. Guidelines on how to conduct 
investigations into the cause of death was prepared 
in China in thirteenth century. In sixteenth century, 


CFMT-01 (3rd Proof).p65 


3 


8/12/07, 9:24 AM 


















4 Concise Textbook of Forensic Medicine and Toxicology 


the Penal Code of the Bishop of Bamberg and the 
Caroline Code emphasised on the role of medical 
evidence in court trials. The famous book on 
Medico-legal questions, Questiones Medico-legales, 
was written by Paolo Zacchia in 1621 in seven 
volumes. He was the principal physician to Pope 
Innocent X and Alexander VII. 

Towards the end of the sixteenth century, 
medico-legal autopsies started becoming frequent 
at various places around the world. The first book 
on Forensic Medicine was written in 1602 by 
Fortunate Feedele, an Italian physician. Famous 
works on medico-legal scenario by Zacchia was 
published in seventeenth century. In eighteenth 
century, professorship in legal medicine was created 
in Germany. Orfila (1737-1853) was the professor 
of chemistry and legal medicine in Paris and is 
regarded as the founder of modern toxicology. 

FORENSIC MEDICINE IN INDIA 

Manusmriti (3102 B.C.) is the first treatise on various 
laws written by King Manu. It prescribed code of 
conduct for society and had many medico-legal laws 
about marriage, punishment for rape, adultery, etc. 

Vedas (2000-1000 B.C.), especially 
Atharvaveda, furnish details about how to cure 
wounds, poisoning and snake bites. The first Indian 
book on medicine, Agnivesha Charaka Samhita 
was written by the famous physician Charaka. It 
describes training, duties, privileges and social 
status of physicians. It is considered as Indian code 


of medical ethics. Sushruta Samhita written by 
Sushruta in 200-300 A.D. refers to poisons, snake 
signs and treatment of poisoning. Sushruta is 
considered to be the Father of Indian surgery. Unani 
system of medicine was introduced in India by 
Mughal rulers when Ayurveda was flourishing in 
India. Coroner’s Act 1811 was introduced by British 
in Kolkata and Mumbai and police investigations 
began in India then. The first chair of professor of 
Medical Jurisprudence was established in 1857 at 
Madras Medical College. 

The Indian Penal Code (I.P.C.) came into existence 
in 1860 and Criminal Procedure Code in 1861. The 
Indian Medical Council Act came in 1933 and 
established the Medical Council of India at New Delhi. 

The most outstanding contribution in medico¬ 
legal field in India was made to modern 
dactylography. Sir William Herschel of the Indian 
Civil Service in 1858 used dactylography as a 
method of identification, which was later improved 
by Sir Francis Galton. 

The modern Forensic Medicine in India was 
started by Dr Jaising P. Modi. For the first time in 
India in 1920, he was the one who wrote a book on 
Forensic Medicine and toxicology. It was titled. 
Medical Jurisprudence and Toxicology. He is called 
the Father of Forensic Medicine in India. He 
described the Indian medico-legal experience for 
the first time in his book. In the last fifty years, the 
specialty of Forensic Medicine has grown all over 
India and is a part of curriculum in all medical 
schools. Now, various organisations are working 
in this field for improvement of the specialty. 


CFMT-01 (3rd Proof).p65 


4 


8/12/07, 9:24 AM 


















CHAPTER 

Legal Procedures 


INQUEST 

Inquest means ‘to seek’. It is an enquiry into the 
cause of death. It is conducted where there is 
suspicion regarding cause of death or cause of death 
is to be ascertained. There are four types of inquests: 

1. Police Inquest 

2. Coroner Inquest 

3. Magistrate Inquest 

4. Medical Examiner system 

Police Inquest 

It is held all over India and conducted by a 
competent and authorised police officials. The 
inquest is held under Section 174 of Cr. PC. The 
police officer who conducts this is called an 
Investigating Officer. The police receives 
information from village chowkidars (guards), 
public informers, hospitals, and various agencies. 
On receipt of information about the crime, it is 
noted in a daily diary register. This entry is 
commonly called a Daily diary (DD) entry. Once 
the DD entry is made, an investigating Officer is 
deputed on the scene of crime to conduct inquest. 
The Investigating Officer reaches the scene of the 
crime and takes the stock of the situation. If a person 
is injured or needs medical assistance, he is rushed 
to the hospital. If the victim is dead, the 
Investigating Officer seals the scene of crime and 
if needed sends requisition for a photographer, 
fingerprint experts, ballistic experts, etc. to collect 


evidence. He prepares a detailed report called 
panchnama in presence of public witnesses 
( panchas ) who had some knowledge of the crime. 
This panchnama is called inquest papers. He then 
forwards the dead body to the medico-legal expert for 
a post-mortem examination. On reaching the police 
station, a first information report (FIR) is lodged by 
him under relevant sections of the Indian Penal Code 
and investigation into the circumstances of the crime 
begins. 

Coroner’s Inquest 

Previously, it was held in Mumbai and Kolkota 
under Coroner Act of 1871. It was first abolished 
in Calcutta, later in Mumbai. It is of historical value 
in India but coroner’s inquest is still prevalent in 
many parts of the world. The coroner’s inquest is 
held in following cases: 

1. Sudden death where cause of death is not 
known. 

2. Suicide, homicide and infanticide. 

3. Accidental death, poisoning, traffic 
accidents, drug mishap, industrial accidents. 

4. Death occurring while in treatment like 
under anaesthesia. 

5. Custodial deaths like death in prison, police 
station, mental asylum, etc. 

The coroner used to be of the rank of a First 
Class Magistrate. He had the powers to order a post¬ 
mortem and exhumation. He had the power to 
summon a doctor to depose in his court. He had 


CFMT-02 (3rd Proof).p65 


5 


8/14/07, 3:51 PM 


















6 Concise Textbook of Forensic Medicine and Toxicology 


the powers to summon witnesses and record 
statements and if he suspected foul play he used to 
give a verdict of foul play and then assign the case 
to the concerned magistrate for trial. When the 
accused was not found he used to return an open 
verdict which means that the inquest was postponed 
indefinitely and could be opened on receipt of new 
information. In a coroner’s court, the presence of 
the accused was not essential. 

Magistrate Inquests 

It is held under Section 176 Cr. P.C. and is conducted 
by an executive magistrate like Subdivisional or 
District magistrate. It is considered to be superior to 
police inquest. It is held in following cases: 

1. Death in prison 

2. Death in police custody 

3. Death due to police firing 

4. Dowry deaths under Sec. 304B of the Indian 
Penal Code 

5. Any case where the government orders that 
inquest needs to be conducted by a magistrate. 

Magistrate can order exhumation. Earlier, a 
coroner also had the power to order exhumation. 
In any case of death, magistrate can hold inquest 
even if the police has already made the inquest. 

Medical Examiner System 

This system is prevalent in the United States of 
America where a forensic pathologist is appointed 
as a medical examiner. He conducts the post¬ 
mortem and usually visits the scene of crime. Being 
a doctor, he is able to easily correlate injuries with 
circumstances. He submits his report to the district 
attorney for further action. This system is 
considered superior to a police inquest. 

DIFFICULTIES IN DETECTION OF CRIME IN 
INDIA 

The following are the difficulties which are 
commonly faced in detecting crime in India: 


1 . The Delay in Information: Police is unable 
to act on time as information regarding 
crime reaches the police quite late due to 
lack of communication facilities like 
telephones, etc., especially in villages or 
remote areas. 

2. Decomposition: As police reaches late, the 
signs of decomposition may have already 
set in and vital evidence may be lost. 

3. Lack of Medical Knowledge: As majority 
of police officials are ignorant about medical 
knowledge, they experience difficulty in 
correlating injuries with circumstances. 

4. Rapid Disposal of Dead Bodies: As per 
religious customs, cremation is done in 
Hindu and Sikh communities, if the body is 
cremated before arrival of police, vital 
evidence may be lost. Even in cases of 
burial, rapid decomposition may cause loss 
of evidence as the permission for 
exhumation may take some time. 

COURTS IN INDIA 

As doctors have to appear in various courts of law, 
it is better for them to get familiar with different 
courts in India and their powers (Table 2.1). There 
are two types of courts in India: (1) civil and (2) 
criminal. 

The courts in India are of four types: 

1 . The Supreme Court: It is located in New 
Delhi, and is the highest judicial tribunal in 
India. It can pass any sentence prescribed 
by the law and supervises all the courts in 
India. The law declared by it is binding on 
all courts. 

2. The High Court: It is usually located in 
the capital of every State, and is the highest 
tribunal of the state. It can try any offence 
and pass any sentence prescribed by the law. 

3. The Sessions Court: It is located at district 
headquarters, and can pass any sentence 
authorised by the law but the death sentence 
passed by it must be confirmed by the High 
court. 


CFMT-02 (3rd Proof).p65 


6 


8/24/07, 3:42 PM 


















Legal Procedures 7 


4. The Magistrate Courts: The magistrate 

courts are of following types: 

(a) Chief Judicial Magistrate or Chief 
Metropolitan Magistrate can pass 
imprisonment for up to 7 years, and can 
also impose fine without limit. He can 
order solitary confinement as well. 

(b) First Class Magistrate or Metropolitan 
Magistrate can pass a maximum of 3 
years sentence, fine up to Rs. 5000/- and 
can also order solitary confinement. 

(c) Second Class Magistrate can sentence 
up to one year, and fine up to Rs. 1000/-. 
Also, he can order solitary confinement. 

Cognisable Offences 

It is an offence where a police officer can arrest a 
person without a warrant from the magistrate, e.g. 
rape, murder, grievous hurt, etc. 

The sentences authorised by law are: (a) death, 
(b) imprisonment for life, (c) rigorous impris¬ 
onment, and/or solitary confinement, (d) simple 
imprisonment, (e) forfeiture of property, (f) fine, 
and (g) detention for treatment, training and 
rehabilitation of young offenders under the age of 
16 years. 

Subpoena or Summons (Sub means under, 
poena means penalty) 

It is a document issued by the court commanding 
the attendance of the witness to appear in the court 

Table 2.1 Powers of different courts 


under penalty threat on a specified day, time and 
place for giving evidence. It may also ask him to 
produce any book, document or case records 
supposedly under his control for the inspection by 
the court. The witness can be excused from 
attending the court only if he has some valid and 
urgent reasons. 

Noncompliance of summon may render a 
person to pay damages in a civil case, or pay fine 
or sustain imprisonment in criminal cases. Criminal 
courts have priority over civil courts. If a person 
has received two summons for the same day, one 
of which is from a criminal court and the other from 
the civil, he should attend the criminal court and 
should inform the civil court. Higher courts have 
priority over the lower courts. If summoned to two 
courts, both civil and criminal, he should first attend 
the higher court. If he is summoned by two courts 
of the same status he should attend the court from 
where he has received the summons first, informing 
the other court. 

Conduct Money 

In civil cases, a reasonable sum that would be 
incurred as travelling expenses is usually tendered 
at the time of serving of summons. This is known 
as ‘conduct money’. It is paid by the party who has 
called him to give evidence. If the fee is not paid, 
doctor can ignore the summon or, if he feels it is 
insufficient, he can bring it to the notice of the court 
which will decide whether it is reasonable or not. 
If the court feels it is insufficient, it may direct the 
party who has called the doctor to give evidence or 



Court 

Death sentence 

Imprisonment 

Fine 

1 . 

Magistrate Court 

(a) Second Class Magistrate 

No 

One year 

Rs. 1000/- 


(b) First Class Magistrate 

No 

Three years 

Rs 5000/- 


(c) Chief Judicial Magistrate 

No 

Seven years 

No limit 

2. 

Sessions Court 

Yes 

Life sentence 

No limit 

3. 

High Court 

(but to be confirmed 
by High Court) 

Yes 

Life sentence 

No limit 

4. 

Supreme Court 

Yes 

Life sentence 

No limit 


CFMT-02 (3rd Proof).p65 


7 


8/14/07, 3:51 PM 





















8 Concise Textbook of Forensic Medicine and Toxicology 


to pay more. In criminal cases, no fee is paid at the 
time of serving summons. However, usually the 
court gives travelling charges and daily allowance 
after the doctor has deposed in the court. 

COURT PROCEDURE 

The evidence of the witness is recorded as follows: 

1. Oath 

2. Examination-in-chief 

3. Cross-examination 

4. Re-examination 

5. Questions put by the judge 

Oath 

Before starting the procedure, witness has to take 
an oath. The format is: “I swear by God that I shall 
speak truth, the whole truth and nothing else but 
truth.” If the witness is an atheist, he has to make 
solemn affirmation instead of swearing by God. 

Examination-in-Chief 

The first examination is done by the counsel who 
has called the witness to the box. In this 
examination, no leading questions can be asked. A 
leading question is defined as the question, which 
suggests some answer, e.g. “whether on the day of 
murder you were wearing a red shirt or not?” The 
purpose of the examination-in-chief is to place on 
record, all the information the witness has about 
the case. In case of medical witness it is the public 
prosecutor who examines him first. 

Cross-examination 

It is considered to be the most reliable procedure 
of testing the value of an evidence and is held by 
the counsel for the accused, or the opposite party. 
The witness may be asked any question including 
the leading question. There is no time limit fixed 
for cross examination. 

However, the court reserves its right to disallow 
any question it deems unnecessary or insulting to 
the witness. 


Re-examination 

The counsel who has first conducted examination- 
in-chief, has the right to re-examine the witness 
with the aim to explain any ambiguities, to correct 
any mistake the witness has made during cross- 
examination. But the witness should not introduce 
any new fact without the consent of the judge or 
the opposing counsel, lest he would be liable to 
cross-examination. 

Questions Put by the Judge 

The judge may ask any question at any stage to 
clear its doubts. 

PERJURY 

Perjury means willful utterance of falsehood by a 
witness under oath. He is liable to be prosecuted 
for the same. 

Medical Evidence 

It is of two types: 

1. Written or documentary evidence 

2. Oral evidence. 

Documentary Evidence 

This refers to all documents produced for the 
inspection of court, e.g. (a) medical certificate, (b) 
medico-legal report, and (c) dying declaration. 

Medical Certificate: It refers to ill health, insanity, 
birth and death. It has to be signed by a registered 
medical practitioner. In giving certificate of ill 
health, the doctor should mention the exact nature 
of the illness, and take the signature (preferably) 
or thumb impression of the patient. 

From April 1, 1969, under the Registration of 
Births and Deaths Act, the registration of births and 
deaths is compulsory. It is obligatory for a medical 
practitioner who has attended the last illness of the 
deceased person to issue a death certificate. The 
medical practitioner is not entitled to charge any 
fees for issuing a death certificate. 


CFMT-02 (3rd Proof).p65 


8 


8/14/07, 3:51 PM 


















Legal Procedures 9 


Table 2.2 Differences between dying declaration and dying deposition 




Dying declaration 

Dying deposition 

1 . 

Recorded by 

Anyone 

Only magistrate 

2. 

Oath 

Not necessary 

Necessary 

3. 

Presence of the accused 

Not essential 

Accused/lawyer is allowed 

4. 

Cross-examination 

Not allowed 

Allowed 

5. 

Value 

Less value as compared to 
dying deposition 

More value as compared to dying 
declaration 


Medico-legal Reports: These documents are 
prepared by the doctor on the request of police or 
investigating agencies in criminal cases like assault, 
rape, murder, poisoning, etc. The reports consist 
of two parts: (a) facts observed on examination, 
and (b) opinion drawn from the facts. The report is 
not admitted unless the doctor testifies in the court. 
Exhibits like clothing, weapon, etc. sent for 
examination should be described in detail after 
examination and should be handed over after it is 
properly sealed. 

Dying Declaration: It is a statement, written or 
verbal, of a person who is dying as a result of some 
unlawful act, relating to facts of cause of his death 
or any of the circumstances resulting in death. 

If there is time, a magistrate should be called. If 
there is an emergency, the doctor himself should 
record the statement. But before recording, he should 
certify that the person is compose mentis, i.e. he is 
conscious and his mental faculties are normal. The 
statement can be recorded by police or any other 
person. The statement should be noted down in the 
man’s own words without any alteration. Leading 
question should be read over to the person and his 
signature or thumb impression should be taken at 
the end. If the person is able to give only partial 
statement, and then he becomes unconscious, only 
the partial statement should be recorded. The dying 
declaration is admissible in court as evidence even 
if the person was not under expectation of death at 
that time. It is accepted as evidence at the time of 
trial if the person dies. If the declarant survives, the 
declaration is not admitted and the person is called 
to provide oral evidence (Table 2.2). 


Dying Deposition: It is the statement of a person 
on oath before a magistrate, in the presence of the 
accused or his counsel, who in turn, is allowed to 
cross-examine the witness. The doctor should first 
certify whether the person is capable of making a 
statement or not (compose mentis). It means court 
by the bedside, and has greater value as compared 
to dying declaration (Table 2.2). 

Oral Evidence 

It includes all statements made before the Court, 
by the witness, in relation to the matter under 
investigation. The oral evidence must be direct. Oral 
evidence is much more important than documentary 
evidence as it allows cross-examination. 
Documentary evidence is accepted by the court 
only on oral evidence by the person concerned. The 
following are the exceptions: 

1. Dying declaration 

2. Expert opinion expressed in a treatise may 
be proved in court by producing such a 
book, if the author is dead or cannot be 
found or called witness without 
unreasonable delay or expenses. 

3. Evidence of doctor recorded in a lower court 
is admissible in a higher court, provided it 
was recorded by a magistrate in the presence 
of the accused. 

4. Evidence given by a witness in a previous 
judicial proceeding, is admissible in 
subsequent judicial proceedings when the 
witness is dead or cannot be found, or is 
incapable of giving evidence, or cannot be 
called without undue delay or unreasonable 
expense. 


CFMT-02 (3rd Proof).p65 


9 


8/14/07, 3:51 PM 





















10 Concise Textbook of Forensic Medicine and Toxicology 


5. Evidence of mint officer. 

6. Reports of certain government scientific 
experts like: (i) Chemical Examiner, (ii) 
Chief Inspector of Explosives, (iii) Director, 
Fingerprint bureau, (iv) Director, Elaffkine 
Institute, Mumbai, (v) Director, Central 
Forensic Science Laboratories, and (vi) the 
serologist, can be asked for. The court has 
power to summon and examine these 
experts. 

7. Public records: Routine entries, operative 
notes, discharge summaries are admissible 
without oral evidence. But the cause of 
disease/death is not accepted without oral 
testimony. 

TYPES OF WITNESS 

Witness is of two types: 

1. Common witness 

2. Expert witness 

Common Witness 

He is the person who gives evidence about the facts 
within his knowledge and perception. He states 
what he has actually observed. He provides a first 
hand knowledge. 

Expert Witness 

He is the person who has been trained or is skilled 
in a technical or scientific subject, and is capable 
of inferring opinion from the facts observed by him 
as a doctor, fingerprint expert, etc. 

A doctor can be both, a common and an expert 
witness. When he describes the injuries on the body 
he becomes a common witness. But when he tells 
how the injuries may have been produced he acts 
like an expert witness. Hostile witness is the one 
who gives false evidence because of some interest 
or motive or by concealing the truth. 


CONDUCT AND DUTIES OF A DOCTOR IN 
THE WITNESS BOX 

The following are general principles a doctor 
should observe while giving evidence: 

1. He must attend court punctually and 
produce all the documents asked for. His 
dress should be consistent with Iris dignity. 

2. He should be well prepared with the details 
of the case, anticipate likely questions, study 
the literature and stand up straight. 

3. He should never attempt to memorise. He 
should speak slowly and distinctly with 
confidence. He should address the judge as 
“Sir” or “Your Honour.” 

4. He should use simple language, avoid 
superlatives and exaggeration. He should 
not fumble while reporting for records or 
literature. Avoid discrepancy between 
record and testimony. 

5. The doctor should be pleasant and polite to 
the counsel or the accused. He should not 
try to evade a question and should not lose 
his temper. 

6. He should retain independence of his mind. 
He should be honest, impartial and truthful. 

7. He should avoid long discussions. Express 
an opinion from his own knowledge and 
experience. 

8. Text books of repute can be offered in 
evidence. Before answering, he should read 
out the complete passage, as the lawyer 
might have read only the statements that 
favour him. 

9. A medical man does not have the 
professional privilege and therefore, must 
answer all questions. 

10. The doctor should volunteer information if 
he thinks injustice would result if he does 
not make a statement. The response should 
not exceed beyond the expert’s knowledge. 


CFMT-02 (3rd Proof).p65 


10 


8/14/07, 3:51 PM 


















CHAPTER 

3 

Identification 


Identification is recognition of a person based on 
certain characteristics which may be (a) complete, 

i.e. exact fixation of personality, and (b) incomplete 
like determination of age, sex, race, stature, etc. 
The doctor is called upon to establish the identity 
of a dead body or a person brought to him. 
Identification of a living person is required in 
criminal cases like, absconding soldiers, person 
accused of assault, murder, rape, interchange of 
newborn babies, disputed paternity, etc. and in case 
of impersonation. In civil cases, identity of a living 
person is required in cases like marriage, 
inheritance, disputed sex, etc. The identification of 
dead bodies is required in cases of sudden and 
unexpected deaths, fire explosions, railway or 
aircraft accidents. At least two identification marks 
should be noted by the doctor and mentioned in all 
medico-legal reports. 

THE CORPUS DELICTI 

The corpus delicti means body of offense or essence 
of crime. In case of a murder, it is the fact that a 
person has died from unlawful violence and 
includes the body of the victim and other facts like 
bullet, knife or clothing. 

The following points are usually seen for the 
purpose of identification: 

1. Race 

2. Sex 

3. Age 

4. Complexion and features 

5. Hair 


6. Anthropometry 

7. Dactylography and footprints 

8. Deformities 

9. Scars 

10. Tattoo marks 

11 . Occupation marks 

12. Handwriting 

13. Miscellaneous methods of identification 
such as: 

(a) Clothes and personal articles 

(b) Speech and voice 

(c) Gait 

(d) Ticks, manners and habit 

(e) Mental power, memory and education. 

Race 

It can be determined by following characteristics: 

1. Complexion: The skin is brown in Indians, 
fair in Europeans and black in Negroes. It 
is of limited value. 

2. Eyes: Indians have dark eyes, Europeans 
have blue or grey eyes. 

3. Hair: Indians have black, thin hair; 
Europeans have fair or light brown or 
reddish hair. Indians, Mongolians and 
Europeans have straight or wavy hair while 
Negroes have woolly hair (arranged in 
spirals). Mongolian hair is coarse and dark 
and usually circular on cross-examination 
and has dense uniform pigmentation and 
dark medulla. Negro hair is elongated, oval 
on cross-section and has dense pigment with 
an irregular distribution. 


CFMT-03 (3rd Proof).p65 


11 


8/12/07, 9:25 AM 


















12 Concise Textbook of Forensic Medicine and Toxicology 


Table 3.1 Cephalic index in relation to different skulls and races 

Types of skull 

Cephalic index 

Race 

1. Dolicho-cephalic (long headed) 

70-75 

Pure Aryans, aborigine Negroes 

2. Mesati-cephalic (medium headed) 

75-80 

Europeans and Chinese 

3. Brachy-cephalic (short headed) 

80-85 

Mongols 


Caucasian hair has oval shape in cross- 
section with uniform distribution of fine or 
coarse pigment. 

4. Skeleton: The cephalic index or index of 
breadth of skull is very important: 


Cephalic index = 


Maximum breadth of skull 


x 100 


Maximum length of skull 
The measurements are made with callipers (Table 3.1). 
Characteristics of Hindu males are that they are 
not circumcised, sacred thread, necklace of wooden 
beads (Rudraksh), caste marks on forehead, tuft of 
hair on head and pierced ear lobes. The Hindu 
females may have vermilion on scalp, silver toe 
ornaments, tattoo marks, nose ring aperture in left 
nostril, few openings for ear rings along the helix. 
Muslim females may have nose ring aperture in 
septum only, several openings in ears along the 
helix. All Muslim males are circumcised. 


Sex 

Sex of individual can be determined either by 
clinical method or investigations. 

Clinical Method 

It is by observing secondary sexual characters of 
the individual. In males, presence of a well- 
developed penis and testes, hair on upper lip, chin, 
chest, pinna, pubic hair extending towards naval, 
underdeveloped breasts and lesser thyroid angle 
(about 90°) are main characteristics for identi¬ 
fication. In females, a well-developed vagina along 
with labia major and minor with clitoris, well- 
developed breasts, greater thyroid angle (about 
120°), pubic hair being horizontal covering only 
mons pubis, are the few features which help in 
identification of the females. But these 


characteristics become prominent only after 
puberty. 

The difficulty arises when there is ambiguity 
of external genitalia and the secondary sexual 
characters are unable to confirm the sex. 

Investigations 

There are investigations for sex determination 
which are as follows: 

1. Sex Chromatin Study: The Ban - body is 
present in females and absent in males. It can be 
easily demonstrated in buccal smear. The 
chromosome in the males is fluorescent to 
quinacrine and can be demonstrated easily. The 
determination of sex is quite important in 
connection with inheritance, marriage, divorce, 
sexual offenses, participation in sports, etc. 

Intersex'. It is intermingling of one sex into 
another. It can be divided into two categories: 

(a) Gonadal agenesis: In this condition the 
testes or ovaries have never been developed. 
The nuclear sex test is negative. It is quite 
rare. 

(b) Gonadal dysgenesis: It is mainly of four 
types: 

(i) Klinefelter’s syndrome: In this, the 
chromosomal pattern is XXY (47 
chromosomes). The anatomical structure is 
of male but nuclear sex is that of a female. 
There is delay in puberty, behavioural 
disorders and mental retardation. Axillary 
and pubic hair are absent and hair on chest 
and chin are reduced. Gynaecomastia, 
azoospermia, low level of testosterone, 
sterility, increased urinary gonadotrophins, 
signs of eunuchoidism and increased height 
are usual characteristics. Testicular 


CFMT-03 (3rd Proof).p65 


12 


8/12/07, 9:25 AM 






















Identification 13 


dysgenesis and hyalinisation of semini¬ 
ferous tubules is reported. Incidence is 1: 
500 and increases with advanced maternal 
age. 

(ii) Turner’s syndrome: The chromosomal 
pattern is XO (45 chromosomes). It can be 
recognised at birth by oedema of dorsum of 
hands and feet, loose skin-folds in the nape 
of neck, low birth weight, and short stature. 
In adults, primary amenorrhoea, sterility, 
lack of primary and secondary sexual 
characteristics, increased gonadotrophins 
excretion, short stature, pigmented navel, a 
short fourth metatarsal, webbed neck, shield 
chest, midset Mongols nipples, high arched 
palate, low set ears, slow growth, spina 
bifida, coarctation of aorta, septal defects, 
renal defects, Cushing’s syndrome and high 
incidence of diabetes mellitus are usual 
features. The gonads do not show primordial 
follicles. 

(iii) True hermaphroditism: It is a very rare 
condition, where testes or ovaries co-exist 
in the body, with external genitalia of both 
sexes. The gonads may be present in 
abdomen, inguinal canal or labio-scrotal 
position. There may be uterus or phallus 
may be penile or clitoral. The labia may 
be bifid as in the females or fused 
resembling scrotum of the male. They are 
usually sterile. 

(iv) Pseudohermaphroditism: In this, external 
characteristics of one sex may be there with 
gonads of the opposite sex. 

A. Male pseudohermaphroditism: 
Nuclear sex is XY but sex organs and 
sexual characteristics are of female 
form. There is testicular feminisation. 

B. Female pseudohermaphroditism: 
Nuclear sex is XX but deviation of sex 
organs and sexual characters towards 
male are seen because of adrenal 
hyperplasia. 


2. Concealed Sex: Criminals may try to 
conceal their sex by dress, or by some other 
methods to avoid getting caught. It can be 
detected easily by clinical, histological, 
chromosomal or hormonal studies. In 
advanced stage of putrefaction, sex of the 
dead bodies can be detected by the presence 
of uterus or prostate, which resist 
putrefaction. 

3. Skeleton: If skeleton is available, it is quite 
useful in the determination of the sex. The 
bones of adult females are usually smaller 
and lighter than that of adult male, and have 
less marked ridges and processes for 
muscular attachments. The frontonasal 
junction is not prominent. The orbits have 
sharp margins and are rounded. The adult 
female skull is lighter and smaller. Its cranial 
capacity being 10 per cent that of adult male. 
The protuberances are less prominent. The 
female thorax is shorter and wider than that 
of the male. The sternum of females are 
shorter and its upper margin is at the level 
of the lower part of the body of the third 
thoracic (dorsal) vertebra while in males, it 
is at the level of lower part of the body of 
the second. The sternal body is less than 
twice the length of manubrium in females 
while it is more than twice its length in the 
male. It is due to the fact that manubrium in 
the male is somewhat smaller than that in 
the female. The ribs are thinner and have 
greater curvature and the costal arches are 
larger in females. 

The pelvis provides most reliable chara¬ 
cteristics for distinguishing sex in over 90 
per cent of individuals. The female pelvis 
is shallower, wider, smoother and less 
massive than the male pelvis. The ilium in 
females are less sloped, their posterior 
borders are more rounded and the anterior 
iliac spines are more widely separated and 
the great sciatic notches are much wider, 
forming almost a right angle, than in the 
male. A female sacrum is short and wide, 


CFMT-03 (3rd Proof).p65 


13 


8/12/07, 9:25 AM 


















14 Concise Textbook of Forensic Medicine and Toxicology 


Age 


and is sharply curved forward in its lower 
half. A male sacrum is long and narrow, has 
a uniform curvature using its whole length 
and may have more than five segments. The 
obturator foramina are triangular in females 
and ovoid in the males. The ischial 
tuberosities are everted in males. The 
acetabula are narrow in the females and wide 
in the males. The pubic arch is wider in 
females, is more rounded, and forms an angle 
rather than an arch. The neck of the femur 
forms almost a right angle with its shaft in 
female, and an obtuse angle in the male. 


The principal methods by which age of a person can 
be determined especially in earlier years are teeth 
(Table 3.2), height and weight, ossification of bones 
(Table 3.1) and secondary sexual characters. 


By examining the teeth, the age of an individual can 
be ascertained up to 17-20 years of age. Beyond 
that it is merely a guess work. There are two types 
of teeth—temporary and permanent. 


Teeth 


Table 3.2 Eruption of temporary and permanent teeth 



Teeth 

Temporary 

Permanent 

1 . 

Central incisors 




(a) Lower 

6th to 8th month 

6th to 8th year 


(b) Upper 

7 th to 9th month 


2. 

Lateral incisors 




(a) Lower 

10th to 12th month 

7th to 9th year 


(b) Upper 

7th to 9th month 


3. 

Canine 

17th to 18th month 

11th to 12th year 

4. 

First premolar 

Absent 

9th to 11th year 

5. 

Second premolar 

Absent 


6. 

First molar 

12th to 14th month 

5th to 6th year 

7. 

Second molar 

20th to 30th month 

12th to 14th year 

8. 

Third molar 

Absent 

17th to 25th year 





Old age-above 
50-60 years 


14 


8/12/07, 9:25 AM 


CFMT-03 (3rd Proof).p65 






























Identification 15 


Temporary teeth: They are also known as milk 
teeth or deciduous teeth. They are 20 in number—4 
incisors, 2 canines and 4 molars in each jaw. 

Permanent teeth: They are 32 in number—4 
incisors, 2 canines, 4 premolars and 6 molars in 
each jaw. The permanent teeth erupted in place of 
temporary teeth which start shedding from about 
sixth or seventh year (Table 3.3). 


Each tooth has a crown, a neck and a root 
embedded in the jaw bone. It is composed of dentin, 
the crown is covered by enamel and the root by 
cementum which is attached to the alveolar bone 
by periodontal membrane. It is observed that dental 
and skeletal ages correspond in males, but in 
females the skeletal age is generally one year more 
than the dental age (Fig. 3.1). 


Table 3.3 Differences between temporary and permanent teeth 


Features 

Temporary teeth 

Permanent teeth 

1. Size 

Small 

Large 

2. Colour 

Porcelain white 

Ivory white 

3. Constriction at 

crown-root junction 

Present 

Absent 

4. Edges 

Sharp 

Serrated 

5. Cusps 

Few and small 

More in numbers and highly 
developed 

6. Number (Maximum) 

20 

32 


Table 3.4 Sequence of appearance of centres of ossification and union of bones and epiphysis 


Age 

Appearance of centre 
of ossification 

Union of bones and epiphysis 

5th year 

Head of radius, trapezium, 

Greater tubercle of humerus fuses with 


scaphoid 

head 

6th year 

Lower end of ulna 

Rami of pubis and ischium unite 

6th to 7th year 

Medical epicondyle of humerus 

— 

9th year 

Olecranon 

— 

9th to 11th year 

Trochlea of humerus 

— 

10th to 11th year 

Pisiform 

— 

13 th year 

Separate centres in triradiate 
cartilage of acetabulum 

— 

12th to 14th year 

Lesser trochanter of femur 

— 

14th year 

Crest of ilium, head and 

Medial epicondyle of humerus, patella 


tubercles of ribs 

complete 

15 th year 

Acromion 

Coracoid with scapula 

16 th year 

Ischial tuberosity 

Lower end of humerus, olecranon to 
ulna, upper end of radius, metacarpals, 

17th to 18th year 


head of femur, lesser and greater 
trochanter of femur, acromion, lower 
end of ulna 

18th to 19th year 

Inner end of clavicle 

Lower end of femur, upper end of tibia 
and fibula, head of humerus, lower end 
of humerus 

18th to 20th year 


Iliac crest 

21st year 


Inner end of clavicle, ischial tuberosity 


CFMT-03 (3rd Proof).p65 


15 


8/12/07, 9:25 AM 
























16 Concise Textbook of Forensic Medicine and Toxicology 


Gustafson’s Method: It is used for age 
estimation in adults above 21 years of age. It depicts 
the physiological changes in each teeth with 
progression in the age. The important changes are 
periodontosis, attrition, secondary dentin, 
cementum apposition, root resorption and 
transparency of the root. Of all these, transparency 
of root is most reliable. 

The four pieces of the body of sternum fuse 
with each other from below upwards between the 
age group 14 and 25 years. The xiphoid fuses with 
the body of sternum at about 40 years. The 
manubrium fuses with the body in very old age or 
sometimes does not fuse. The greater cornuea of 
the hyoid bone fuses with body in 40-60 years of 
age. In skull, the anterior fontanelle closes and two 
halves of the mandible unite during the second year 
(Table 3.4 and Fig. 3.2). 

Secondary Sexual Characters: The sequence 
of appearance of secondary sexual characters in 
males and females are as follows: 


Males: At 14 years, fine hair begin to appear 
on pubis, the testes become large in size and penis 
begins to grow. At 15 years, hair growth on pubis 
is moderate and also starts in axilla. At 16 years, 
hair on pubis is fully grown and genitals acquire 
an adult appearance. Between 16 and 18 years, hair 
begin to grow on the face and voice becomes 
hoarse. 

Females: At 13 years, breasts begin to develop 
and fine, pale, downy hair appear on mons pubis. 
The labia develops and menstruation starts. At 14- 
15 years, growth of pubic hair is good and starts in 
axilla too. 

Medico-legal Importance of Age (Table 3.5) 

The following is the medico-legal importance of age: 
1. Criminal Responsibility: Under Section 
82 of the I.P.C., any act done by a child 
under 7 years of age, is not an offense. 

Under Section 83 of the I.P.C. a child 
between the age of 7 and 12 years is 



CFMT-03 (3rd Proof).p65 


16 


8/12/07, 9:25 AM 

























Identification 17 


presumed to be capable of committing an 
offense if he has attained sufficient maturity 
of understanding to judge the nature and 
consequences of his conduct on that 
occasion. This maturity is presumed in a 
child unless proved otherwise. 

2. Consent: Section 89 of the I.P.C. states that 
a child under 12 years cannot give a valid 
consent to suffer any harm which may occur 
from an act done in good faith and for his 
benefit. Section 87 of the I.P.C. states that a 
person above 18 years of age can give valid 
consent to suffer any harm which may result 
from an act not intended or not known to 
cause death or grievous hurt. The child 
below 12 years cannot give valid consent 
for medical examination. 

3. Juvenile Punishment: According to the 
Juvenile Justice Act 1986, Juvenile means 
a boy who has not attained the age of 18 
years or a girl who is below 18 years. The 
law has established separate courts for the 
juvenile and, instead of jail they are sent to 
juvenile home or Borstal school where there 
are facilities for education, vocational 
training and rehabilitation. 


4. Rape: According to Section 375 of the 
I.P.C., sexual intercourse by a man with a 
girl under 15 years, even if she is his wife 
or with any other girl under 16 years even 
with her consent, is an offense. 

5. Kidnapping: Kidnapping means taking 
away a person illegally from a lawful 
custody. It is an offense to (a) kidnap a child 
with the intention of taking any moveable 
property dishonestly, if the age of the child 
is under 10 years (Section 369 of the I.P.C.), 
(b) kidnap a minor from lawful guardianship 
if the age of the boy is under 16, and that of 
a girl is under 18 years (Section 361 of the 
I.P.C.), (c) push a girl for prostitution, if her 
age is under 18 years (Section 366A of the 
I.P.C.), and (d) import into India from a 
foreign country, a girl for purposes of illicit 
intercourse, if her age is below 21 years 
(Section 366B of the I.P.C.). 

6. Employment: A child below 14 years of 
age is not allowed to work in any factory or 
mine or any other hazardous work. 
However, a person completing 15 years is 
allowed to work in a factory as an adult if a 
fitness certificate is granted by a doctor. 


Table 3.5 Medico-legal importance of age 


Age in years 


Medico-legal relevance 


0-1 year 
Less than 7 years 
7 years 
10 years 
7-12 years 
12 years 

14 years 

15 years 

16 years 

16 years but less than 18 years 
18 years 

21 years 

25-35 years 
60-65 years 


Infanticide 

Criminal immunity 

Criminal responsibility 

Kidnapping for valuables 

Guilty of offence if maturity present 

Can give consent for medical examination 

except for procedures 

Factory employment 

Wife can give consent for sexual intercourse 

Girl can give consent for sexual intercourse 

All offences to be tried under Juvenile Act 

Attain majority. Right to vote. Consent for any surgery, 

marriage age for girls, kidnapping charges for girls 

Attain majority when under guardianship of court 

Marriage age for boys 

Age for entering government service 

Age for retirement from government job 


CFMT-03 (3rd Proof).p65 


17 


8/12/07, 9:25 AM 





















18 Concise Textbook of Forensic Medicine and Toxicology 


Under the Factories Act, 1948 an adult is 
defined as a person who has completed his 
18th year. An adolescent is defined as a 
person who has completed his 15 th year, 
but has not completed his 18th year; and a 
child is defined as a person who has not 
completed his 15 years. 

7. Attainment of Maturity: A person attains 
maturity on completion of 18 years. 
However, if a person is under the 
guardianship of the court of law or is under 
guardian appointed by the court, he attains 
maturity on the completion of 21 years. 

8. Evidence: The competence to depose does 
not depend on age but on understanding. If 
the court is satisfied that the child is truthful, 
any child of any age can give evidence in 
the court (Section 118, Indian Evidence 
Act). 

9. Marriage Contract: A girl under 18 years 
and a boy under 21 years cannot contract 
marriage (Child Marriage Restraint Act, 1987). 

1 0. Infanticide: In a court of law the charge of 
infanticide cannot be sustained if it is proved 
that infant was under the age of 6 months 
intrauterine life. 

11. Criminal Abortion: A woman who has 
already passed the age of child bearing, 
cannot be charged of having criminal 
abortion. 

12. Impotence and Sterility: A woman 
becomes sterile after attaining menopause. 
However, a boy can be sterile although not 
impotent before puberty. 

Complexion and Features 

The complexion may be fair, wheat coloured, dark, 
brown or shallow. The colour of an individual 
ranges from one area to another and depends upon 
race, patterns and weather conditions. The details 


of the features regarding the eyes, nose, ears, lips, 
chin and teeth should always be carefully noted. 
The colour of irises, size of ear lobule should be 
noted. In certain individuals, lips may be thin or 
thick. The chin may be round, square, protruding 
or double (due to excessive fat). Expression of an 
individual changes after death. 

Hair 

Hair plays an important role in establishing identity 
as it resists putrefaction for a longer time. The hair 
of Indians is generally dark and fine, that of Chinese 
and Japanese is dark and coarse, while that of 
Negroes is curly and wooly. Some people in order 
to disguise their identity, might colour hair with 
henna, dyes or cosmetics. The hair may change 
colour in individuals working in certain trades like 
copper melters and indigo workers. To find out the 
chemical use of dyeing, a few strands of hair should 
be removed and they should be diluted in 
hydrochloric or nitric acid to dissolve the matter 
and then appropriate test should be done. 

Medico-legal Importance of Hair 

Hair is important in a crime investigation, as it 
sometimes remains on the body of the victim or 
on the alleged weapon. In rape and sodomy, pubic 
hair of the accused may be found on the victim or 
vice versa. Stains on the hair may sometimes 
indicate the nature of assault, for example, seminal 
stains in sexual offenses and salivary stains in 
asphyxial deaths. In chronic poisoning of heavy 
metals, the metal can be detected in the hair even 
after a long time. Singeing of the hair indicates 
burning. 

Anthropometry 

This system is used primarily for the identification 
of veteran criminals. It is also called Bertillon 


CFMT-03 (3rd Proof).p65 


18 


8/12/07, 9:25 AM 


















Identification 19 


system. It is applicable only to adults, as it is based 
on the principle that after 21 years of age no change 
occurs in the dimensions of the skeleton and ratio 
of the size of different parts to one another remains 
constant. Usual parameters which are taken are 
height of the person while standing, length of the 
head, width of the head, length of the right ear, 
width of the right ear, length of out-stretched arms, 
height of the trunk while sitting, length of the left 
foot, length of the left middle finger, length of the 
left little finger and length of the left forearm and 
hand. These measurements are recorded and kept. 
Certain peculiarities like the colour of irises or scars 
are also mentioned in the record. This system 
requires the employment of special instruments and 
large number of staff. This system has now been 
replaced by a better system called dactylography. 

Dactylography 

This is also known as the fingerprint system and 
consists of taking the impression of the pulp of the 
fingers and thumbs with printer’s ink on an 
unglazed white paper. It is seen that individual 
peculiarities of the pattern formed by the 
arrangement and distribution of the papillary or 
epidermal ridges on the finger tips are absolutely 
constant and persist throughout life (from infancy 
to old age) and, that patterns of no two hands 
resemble each other. The fingerprints of even 
identical twins are different. The chances of two 
persons having identical fingerprints is about one 
in thirty times the population of the world. 

This system was first used in India in 1858 by 
Sir William Herschel but it was Sir Francis Galton 
who established it. Fingerprints are classified in four 
groups, namely, loops (about 67 per cent), whorls 
(about 25 per cent), arches (about 6-7 per cent) and 
composite form (about 1-2 per cent). They are 
further classified into subgroups since arches can 
be plain or tented; loops can be radical or ulnar; and 
composite can be central pocket loops, twinned 
loops, later pocket loops and accidental (Fig. 3.3). 




(C) (d) 

Fig. 3.3 Various types of fingerprints: (a) arch, 

(b) loop, (c) whorl, and (d) composite. 

Poroscopy 

It is a further modification of fingerprints, made 
by Locard. The ridges on fingers and hands are 
constituted of microscopic pores formed by 
openings of ducts of sweat glands. Each millimetre 
of a ridge contains 9-18 pores. These pores are 
permanent, and do not change throughout life. This 
method of examination is useful when only 
fragments of fingerprints are available. 

Technique of Investigating Fingerprints 

The hands are first washed, cleaned and dried. The 
fingerprints are recorded on an unglazed white 
paper using printer’s ink. There are two types of 
prints which are taken: (a) plain fingerprint —is 
taken by applying ink to the tips of the fingers and 
placing the fingers directly on paper. In this, the 
whole contour of the pattern does not appear; 
(b) rolled fingerprint —is taken by rolling the 
fingers on papers so as to obtain impression of the 
whole tip. 

Fingerprints on paper, wood and fabric can be 
developed by treating them with sulphur nitrate 
solution, and then fixing them with sodium 
thiosulphate. Fingerprints can also be developed 
exposing it to the vapours of iodine. 




CFMT-03 (3rd Proof).p65 


19 


8/12/07, 9:25 AM 
























20 Concise Textbook of Forensic Medicine and Toxicology 


Criminals sometimes attempt to mutilate the 
patterns of fingerprints by inflicting wounds or 
burns, application of corrosives but they are not 
obliterated unless true skin is completely destroyed. 
Certain diseases like leprosy may modify the finger¬ 
prints. Electrical injury and radiation may also 
cause impairment. In criminal cases, impression of 
all the 10 fingers are taken, but for civil purposes 
the left thumb impression is taken in case of males 
and right thumb impression in case of females. 

Footprints: The skin pattern of toes and heels 
are as distinct and permanent as those of fingers. 
In case of maternity hospitals, footprints of new¬ 
born infants are taken to prevent exchange. Some 
individuals have also advocated the use of palate- 
prints and lip-prints in the identification of 
individuals. 

Deformities 

They may be congenital or acquired, and are quite 
useful in the identification of individuals. 
Deformities like cleft palate, hare-lip, 
supernumerary fingers of toes, supplementary 
mammae, web fingers or toes and muscles are 
congenital. Clear or acquired deformities, such as 
ununited or malunited fractures are quite useful in 
the identification of the individual. 

Scars 

A scar is a fibrous tissue covered by epithelium 
formed as a result of the healing process of a wound 
or injury in which there has been a breach of 
continuity. It does not contain hair follicles, pigment 
or sweat glands. Generally, a scar assumes the shape 
of the wound causing it. A scar resulting from an 
incised wound is usually straight. Broad and 
irregular scars are caused by lacerated wound. A 
scar appears in 4 or 5 days after healing under a 
scab. It is difficult to tell the exact age of a scar. 
When first formed, a scar is light, tender and 
covered by a scab. Subsequently, it turns brown 
and finally white. These changes are generally seen 


in 3-4 months. Some scars located in the chest and 
limbs grow in size with the natural development of 
the individual, if the injury has been inflicted in 
childhood. 

Tattoo Marks 

Tattooing is prevalent all over the world and is more 
common among persons of low socioeconomic 
status, persons involved in crime, prostitutes, 
religious fanatics and punks. Tattooing is done 
mostly by puncture in which tattoo particles of 
insoluble pigments are introduced into the dermis 
(such as vermilion, cinnabar and ultramarine). 
Designs of various kinds from initials to Gods of 
worship, and sometimes tattoo posture of sexual 
activity are seen. It has been observed that tattoo 
marks may disappear during life without leaving 
any trace on the body after a considerable time, 
namely, in years. It is mostly seen in cases where 
the pigment used is vermilion or ultramarine and if 
it is perforated deep into the skin. Tattoo marks 
may be removed artificially by (a) surgical methods, 
(b) electrolysis, and (c) application of corrosives. 
Small pox and chronic eczema have been shown 
to cause obliteration of tattoo marks (Fig. 3.4). 



Fig. 3.4 Tattoo mark. 


CFMT-03 (3rd Proof).p65 


20 


8/12/07, 9:25 AM 


















Identification 21 


Occupational Marks 

They are quite useful in identification of unknown 
dead bodies as certain trade practices leave marks. 
For example, horny and rough hands are observed 
in individuals doing hard manual labour. Kahars 
and dooly bearers usually have a hardened callous 
on their shoulders. Callosity on the hypothenar 
eminence and right palm is seen in persons involved 
in weighing goods. 

Callosity on the right middle finger distal 
interphalangeal joint, where the pen usually rests, 
is seen in clerks, and depression in the lower part 
of the sternum is found among shoe-makers. Tailors 
have marks of needle punctures on their left index 
finger. Engineers, dyers, chemists and 
photographers generally have their fingers stained 
with dyes or chemicals. These occupational marks 
are quite useful in the identification of an individual. 

Handwriting 

A person may be identified by his handwriting. But 
to identify a person from handwriting requires 
highly skilled experience. However, handwriting 
experts are not at all infallible and their evidence 
may be conflicting. It is observed that mental and 
nervous diseases, especially those causing tremors, 
may alter the character of writing by producing 
more or less irregularities in the formation of letters. 

Miscellaneous Methods of Identification 

The following are the miscellaneous methods of 
identification of an individual: 


1. Clothes and Personal Articles: They do 
not form any special basis for evidence in 
identification of living persons, as the 
individual may change them at will. But they 
are very useful in establishing the identity 
of a dead body, particularly in a mass 
disaster. The clothes can be identified by the 
presence of marks of a dhobi (washerman) 
or that of a tailor. 

2. Speech and Voice: Certain peculiarities of 
speech like stammering, stuttering, hissing 
and nasal twang are characteristics of certain 
individuals. However, speech can be affected 
in many nervous diseases and trauma. Also, 
many cases have been reported in which the 
impersonator has been successful in keeping 
the exact patterns of speech. 

3. Gait: Individuals can be recognised from a 
distance by watching their gait but this 
evidence is far from conclusive as the gait 
may be altered by an accident or disaster. 

4. Ticks, Manners and Habit: These are 
usually hereditary, e.g. left-handness. 
However, repetitive jerky movements of 
shoulders or the muscles of face may be an 
individual characteristic. 

5. Mental Power, Memory and Education: 
Certain individuals have described various 
methods of identification based on the fact 
that no two electrocardiograms (ECG) are 
the same. Some have used lip-prints for 
identification. Some have compared X-rays 
of frontal sinuses after the age of 15. Some 
individuals have advocated the use of 
footprints and palatoprints for identification. 
But all these methods are not standardised, 
so cannot be relied upon. 


CFMT-03 (3rd Proof).p65 


21 


8/12/07, 9:25 AM 


















CHAPTER 

Post-mortem Examination 


The post-mortem examination is a legal 
requirement when the cause of death is not known. 
The objectives of a post-mortem examination are: 

1. To establish the identity of an individual 

2. To know the cause of death 

3. In case of a newborn whether the foetus 
was viable or not. 

The cause of death is defined as disease or 
injury which results in death. The manner of death 
explains how the cause of death came into being. 
The manner of death may be natural or unnatural. 
When a person dies because of some disease, the 
manner of death is natural. If he dies because of 
some injury, the manner of death is unnatural, 
which may be homicidal, suicidal, or accidental. 
The mode of death is the physiological process 
which causes death like asphyxia, coma, and 
syncope. 

CONDUCTING A POST-MORTEM 
EXAMINATION 

The post-mortem examination is conducted only 
on the written request of the police or magistrate. 
In normal circumstances, a police officer or a 
magistrate brings the dead body, along with the 
inquest paper, to a mortuary for post-mortem 
examination. But sometimes, if it is not possible to 
bring the dead body to the mortuary, the doctor 
may be asked to go to the scene of the crime and 
conduct post-mortem examination. This is 
sometimes seen in hills where a vehicle may fall 
into a deep trench resulting in death, and it may 


not be possible to bring the bodies to the mortuary; 
in such cases the doctor conducts the post-mortem 
on the spot. Also, in cases that require exhumation, 
the post-mortem is conducted on the spot. 

Before a post-mortem examination, the doctor 
should read all the inquest papers. The inquest 
papers contain brief facts of the case, statements of 
witnesses, a map of scene of crime, medico-legal 
report, death report, etc. He should also go through 
the enquiries made by the investigating officer. The 
post-mortem should preferably be conducted in 
daylight. Although there is no bar to conduct a 
post-mortem examination at night, there should be 
adequate light if post-mortem is conducted after 
sunset. It is advised that if a post-mortem 
examination is carried out after sunset, necessary 
permission from appropriate authorities may be 
sought. The post-mortem examination should be 
complete and thorough. All the great cavities and 
organs should be examined thoroughly. A partial 
post-mortem is not allowed. 

The post-mortem report consists of following 
components: 

1. Preamble: The name of the deceased, the 
gender, address, time of arrival of the body, 
date and place of examination, name of the 
police officer who brought the body and 
name of the relative who identifies the body, 
should be noted. 

2. The Body of the Report: It consists of 
complete account of external and internal 
examination. All the injuries on the body 
are described. Marks of identification should 
be recorded. 


CFMT-04 (3rd Proof).p65 


22 


8/12/07, 9:26 AM 


















Post-mortem Examination 23 


3. Opinion: This is the most important aspect 
of the report. An opinion regarding the 
cause of death is provided after careful 
consideration of all the findings. The opinion 
should be brief, clear and honest. It should 
be based on scientific facts and terms like 
probably, nearly, etc., should be avoided 
while expressing opinion regarding the cause 
of death. 

After expressing his opinion the doctor should 
put his signature, complete name, designation and 
address below the signature. It is better to put the 
official seal. No unauthorised person should witness 
a post-mortem examination. The doctor should 
preferably write the report immediately after the 
post-mortem examination and hand it over to the 
police official or the magistrate. The copy of the 
report should not be given to any unauthorised 
person. 

External Examination 

Before starting external examination, height and 
weight of the body should be taken. Observation 
regarding nutrition, physique should be made. In 
case of unknown bodies, fingerprints along with 
photographs should be taken. Marks of 
identification like moles, scars, tattoos, deformity, 
etc. should be noted. 

The following procedure should be followed 
for external examination: 

1. The body must be identified by police 
constables who brought the body and it 
should be cross-checked with relatives of 
the deceased. This is necessary especially 
in burn cases and when the body is highly 
decomposed, since facial features of the 
person may have been obliterated due to 
burns or decomposition. 

2. The clothes on the body should be examined 
carefully for stains and tears as these may 
indicate struggle before death. The pockets of 
the clothes should be checked and any item 
found should be noted in the post-mortem 
report. 


3. If ligature material is seen around the neck, 
its position, manner and application of the 
knot should be recorded accurately. 

4. A rough estimate of age should be made 
from general body, teeth examination or 
other physical appearances. 

5. All the natural orifices like mouth, nose, 
ears, anus, urethra and vagina should be 
inspected for injuries, discharges, or foreign 
bodies. Swabs should be taken in suspected 
cases of sexual assaults. 

6. The signs of decomposition and post¬ 
mortem changes should be carefully noted. 

Extent of rigor mortis, post-mortem staining, 
changes in cornea, and dripping of saliva should 
be noted. 

After cleaning the body, all the injuries present 
on the body should be noted. All the injuries should 
be described in detail. The length, breadth and 
depth should be exactly noted. If the injuries are 
deep, the distance of each injury from two fixed 
points on the body should be noted. Fixed points 
of the body include bony prominence, median 
plane, etc. The description of the injury should be 
made in such a manner that the doctor is able to 
reconstruct the same in a court of law, if requested. 
Injection marks present on the body should be 
carefully noted. If required for testing purposes, a 
portion of skin (2.5 cm x 2.0 cm) containing 
injection mark with subcutaneous tissue and muscles 
should be preserved. A similar piece from the 
opposite side should also be taken as control 
specimen. The length, breadth, direction and colour 
of bruises and abrasions should be noted. All bruises 
should be incised to confirm infiltration of blood 
beneath the skin so as to confirm their status as 
ante-mortem or not. No probe should be introduced 
in deep or penetrating wound till the body is opened 
up. In case of fire-arm injuries, blackening around 
the entire wound should be carefully noted. In case 
of burns, exact size, portion and extent should be 
noted. In case of an infant, the condition of the 
umbilical cord should be inspected—whether it is 
tied, torn or cut. 


CFMT-04 (3rd Proof).p65 


23 


8/12/07, 9:26 AM 


















24 Concise Textbook of Forensic Medicine and Toxicology 



Fig. 4.1 Types of incisions for opening the body. 

Internal Examination 

All the three cavities, head, thorax and abdomen 
should always be opened. There is no fixed sequence 
of opening these cavities, but in case of alleged 
infanticide, the head should be opened first so that 
the contents of the skull can be examined before 
blood is drained out by opening other cavities. In 
normal cases, thorax and abdomen are opened first 
and head later on. The spinal cord is normally not 
opened up. Only in cases of suspected spinal injury 
or poison it is opened up. In all other cases it is 
opened last (Fig. 4.1). 


Examination of Head 

The head is opened by giving first a transverse 
incision across the vertex from ear to ear and flaps 
are reflected anteriorly up to orbits and posteriorly 
below the occipital protuberance. The inner surface 
of the scalp should be examined for extravasation 
of blood, petechial haemorrhages or injuries. The 
skull bones should be examined for any fracture or 
separation of sutures, after the periosteum is 
denuded and temporal muscles cut. The skull cap 
is removed by making a circular cut by a saw around 
the cranium just above eye bridges keeping within 
reflected caps. The inner surface of the cap should 
be inspected for fracture of inner plate and any 
haematoma present. Any extra-dural haematoma 
may be noted once the skull cap is removed and 
condition of the dura should be noted. The dura is 
removed by cutting longitudinally along both the 
sides of the midline, and any subdural and sub¬ 
arachnoid haemorrhage should be noted. The brain 
is removed by raising the anterior lobes with fingers 
of left hand and cutting the nerves at its base and 
the medulla as low as possible. The brain should 
be examined for any injuries, embolism, or 
petechial haemorrhages. Different sections of the 
brain should be cut to inspect carefully. The dura 
mater should be removed from the base of the skull 
at last, and fractures should be examined if present 
on the base of the skull or around. 

Examination of Thorax and Abdomen 

The thorax is opened by giving longitudinal incision 
from above the middle of the sternum to the pubic 
bone, avoiding any wounds present in the line. The 
skin and muscles are reflected. The abdominal 
cavity should be examined first, before the thorax 
is opened. The position of the diaphragm, any 
presence of blood, pus, or foreign body in the 
abdomen should be noted. The thorax is opened 
by dividing the ribs at their cartilages and the 
sternum at the sternoclavicular junction with a 
cutter and lifting up the sternum in such a way that 


CFMT-04 (3rd Proof).p65 


24 


8/12/07, 9:26 AM 




















Post-mortem Examination 25 


it does not injure the underlying parts. The pleural 
cavities should be examined for the presence of 
any blood, pus, or injury. 

The heart is examined by opening the 
pericardium. The lungs and heart should be 
removed and examined. The condition of the heart 
should be seen for enlargement or any injury 
present. All the chambers of the heart should be 
examined for any thrombus, embolus, etc. All 
coronary arteries should be examined by giving a 
small incision for any blockage or atherosclerosis. 
The dissection of the heart is done in the direction 
of flow of blood for better appreciation. The lungs 
should be examined for injury, collapse, diseases, 
etc. To examine bronchioles and air passages, 
dissection of lungs should be done through hilum. 
All the bronchioles can be opened by following 
their directions as they go inside the lung. The 
trachea and bronchioles should be examined for 
the presence of water, blood, foreign body, pus, 
etc. The aorta and rib cage should be inspected for 
any injury or disease. An incision is made from 
the chin to the upper part of the sternum after the 
head is placed backward, and a piece of block is 
kept below the neck. The skin is reflected and the 
neck is examined layer by layer by cutting the 
muscles. Any extravasation of blood or injury to 
blood vessels, muscles, thyroid, cricoid cartilage, 
hyoid bone should be noted. 

The trachea and oesophagus should also be 
inspected. The peritoneal cavity should be 
examined for adhesion or injury. The abdominal 
organs should be removed and inspected: 

1. Stomach: The stomach should be removed 
by tying a ligature 3-5 cm above the cardiac 
end and another at the pyloric end. It is 
opened along the greater curvature and its 
contents examined. The mucosal surface of 
the stomach should be carefully inspected 
for congestion. The contents of the stomach 
should be weighed and their degree of 
digestibility should be noted. Any particular 
smell of contents should always be noted. 


In case of suspected poisoning, the entire 
stomach along with its contents is preserved. 

2. Intestines: Both small and large intestines 
should be inspected by cutting the mesentery 
and examined for congestion, ulcer & 
perforation. In cases of suspected poisoning 
a small part of the upper intestine is 
preserved. 

3. Liver: The liver should be examined for 
any injury, disease, etc. The surface of the 
liver should be inspected. The gall bladder, 
pancreas and spleen should also be inspected 
for any disease or injury. 

4. Kidney: The kidneys should be inspected 
by cutting open and examined for any injury 
or diseases (Table 4.1). 

5. Urinary bladder: It should be examined 
for its contents and surface. In case of 
suspected poisoning, urine can be collected 
by a catheter before opening the bladder. 
The prostate and testes should be examined 
by cutting section. 

6. Uterus: In a female body the examination 
of uterus is very essential. In nulliparous 
women, it is of very small size, around 7.5 
cm x 5 cm x 2.5 cm. Its weight depends on 
whether the woman is pregnant or not. 
Uterus should be cut longitudinally and its 
inner surface should be examined for any 
changes. The ovaries and fallopian tubes 
should also be examined. 

7. Spine and Spinal Cord: In normal 
circumstances, it is not opened up. But if 
some injury or disease is suspected, it is 
opened up. The body is turned over on the 
face and a block is kept below the thorax; 
and an incision is made along the entire 
length of the vertebral column from the 
occiput to the lower end of the sacrum. 
After reflecting muscles and skin, the lamina 
are cut by a saw and the spinal cord is 
inspected. The vertebral column should be 
inspected for any fracture, disease, etc. After 
the post-mortem examination is over, all 


CFMT-04 (3rd Proof).p65 


25 


8/12/07, 9:26 AM 


















26 Concise Textbook of Forensic Medicine and Toxicology 


Table 4.1 Weight capacity of common organs/structures 


Organs/Structures 

Male 

Female 

l. 

Brain 

1400-1450 gm 

1275-1300 gm 

2. 

Spinal cord 

30-45 gm 

30-45 gm 

3. 

Heart 

300-350 gm 

250-300 gm 

4. 

Thyroid gland 

20-40 gm 

20-40 gm 

5. 

Lungs 




Right Lung 

360-570 gm 

360-570 gm 


Left Lung 

325-480 gm 

325-480 gm 

6. 

Liver 

1400-1500 gm 

1400-1500 gm 

7. 

Spleen 

150-200 gm 

150-200 gm 

8. 

Kidney 

130-160 gm 

120-150 gm 

9. 

Testis 

20-25 gm 

Not Applicable 

10. 

Ovary 

Not Applicable 

5-7 gm 

11. 

Uterus 




Nulliparous 

Not Applicable 

30-40 gm 


Multiparous 

Not Applicable 

100-120 gm 

12. 

Stomach 




Length 

25-30 gm 

25-30 gm 


Capacity 

1100-1200 ml 

1100-1200 ml 

13. 

Small intestine 

550-650 cm 

550-650 cm 

14. 

Large intestine 

150-170 cm 

150-170 cm 

15. 

Vagina 




Anterior wall 

Not Applicable 

7.5 cm 


Posterior wall 

Not Applicable 

10 cm 


the organs are replaced in the body, and the 
body is stitched up and covered with cloth; 
and then handed over to police who then 
forwards it to relatives for disposal. 

Preservation of Viscera and Other Articles 

In suspected cases of poisoning, the viscera is 
preserved to rule out common poisoning. The 
viscera should be preserved in clean, wide-mouthed 
glass bottles fitted with glass stoppers. The 
following viscera are preserved commonly: 

1. Stomach with all its contents. 

2. Small intestine along with contents. About 
1.0 m in adult, 1.5 m in children and whole 
in infants. 

3. Liver: About 400-500 gm; whole in infants. 

4. Spleen: Half in adults and whole in infants 
and children. 


5. Kidney: Half each of both kidneys in adults, 
but both in children and infants. 

6. Sample of blood: A gauze piece is soaked 
in blood, and then dried before handing 
over. 

7. Sample of preservative: Commonly, the 
above viscera are preserved in a saturated 
solution of common salt. A sample of 
preservative is also given along with viscera 
as a control. 

The stomach and small intestine along with 
their respective contents are preserved in one bottle 
while liver, spleen, and kidneys are preserved in 
another bottle. The blood sample should be 
preserved separately. If alcohol is suspected, sodium 
fluoride should be used as the preservative. In all 
acid poisoning except carbolic acid, rectified spirit 
should be used as a preservative. Sufficient quantity 


CFMT-04 (3rd Proof).p65 


26 


8/12/07, 9:26 AM 





















Post-mortem Examination 27 


of preservative should be used as to occupy about 
three fourth of the bottle. If some volatile substance 
is suspected, e.g. a poison, paraffin oil should be 
put above the layer of the preservative so that 
volatile substance is not evaporated. Vomitus 
present should be preserved (at least 300 ml, or the 
entire quantity if less). 

After all the viscera bottles are sealed, they 
should be put in a box and sealed. It should be 
handed over to police for onward transmission to 
the Forensic Science Laboratory. Nowadays, due 
to modern techniques, less quantity of viscera is 
required for extraction of poison. Formalin should 
never be used as a preservative. A sample of the 
seal should always be given along with box to the 
police. 

Following items are also preserved in special 
situations: 

1. Portion of the brain and the heart in rectified 
spirit in cases of poisoning, where nux 
vomica or strychnine is suspected. 

2. Lungs and blood from the cavity of the heart 
are preserved in cases of suspected poisoning 
by carbon monoxide, alcohol, chloroform, 
or hydrocyanic acid. 

3. The cerebrospinal fluid is preserved in 
suspected alcohol poisoning. 

4. A portion of the skin, subcutaneous and 
muscle tissue in cases of poisoning by 
injection. 

5. A few pieces of long bones about 15 cm 
long in suspected poisoning by arsenic or 
antimony. In such cases the finger nails and 
hair should also be sent with skin samples. 

6. The uterus along with its contents should 
be preserved in criminal abortion. 


Cause of Death 

After completing the post-mortem examination, it 
is the duty of the doctor to give the cause of death 
after careful consideration of all the findings 
observed in the post-mortem examination. 
The doctor should write the post-mortem report 
immediately after the post-mortem examination is 
over and hand it over to the concerned police officer 
or magistrate. If it is not possible to write the report 
immediately, it should be completed as early as 
possible. If the doctor needs help he should not 
hesitate to seek it. The rough notes should be 
destroyed immediately after the report is written. 
The report should be detailed, concise and clear. 
Unnecessary use of phrases/words like ‘most 
probable’ or ‘likely’ should be avoided. If the doctor 
is not able to form an opinion immediately and needs 
report of the viscera, the cause of death should be 
kept pending and reasons should be written in the 
final report. A duplicate copy of the report should 
be kept for records. 

Alternative Way of Post-mortem Examination 

The following are the alternative ways to know 
the cause of death: 

1. Psychological Autopsy: The term is 
sometimes used when perusal of medical 
and personal history is done along with 
circumstantial evidences like suicide note, 
scene of crime, etc. This is quite useful in 
cases of suspected suicide where mindset of 
the person who committed suicide is 
analysed. In reality, it is not an autopsy. 

2. Endoscopic Autopsy: If for any reason, 
conventional autopsy is not possible, then a 
post-mortem endoscopic examination can 
be done in some cases through a telescope 
device attached to a video camera. 


CFMT-04 (3rd Proof).p65 


27 


8/12/07, 9:26 AM 


















CHAPTER 

Examination of Decomposed and 
Mutilated Bodies, Skeletal 
Remains, and Exhumation 


EXAMINATION OF DECOMPOSED BODIES 

Sufficient care should be taken while examining 
decomposed bodies, as features may be altered and 
there may be difficulty in appreciating injuries. 
Due to an advanced stage of decomposition, the 
ligature mark on the neck may not be appreciated 
well as the skin may be peeled off. The shape of 
the injuries may be altered by maggots present on 
the body. Sometimes, the body may be in such an 
advanced form of decomposition that the cause of 
death may not be found. In all such cases, the viscera 
should be preserved. Facial features may be 
distorted due to decomposition and may pose 
problems in identification. In such cases, the body 
may be identified by other features like clothes, 
tattoo marks, fingerprints, etc. If no cause of death 
is finally possible, it may be mentioned in the post¬ 
mortem report that no cause of death could be found 
due to advanced stage of putrefaction. 

EXAMINATION OF MUTILATED BODIES OR 
FRAGMENTS 

The body may be found in a mutilated form not 
only as a result of a criminal act but also due to 
animal bites. Sometimes, it may happen that because 
of an accident or severe trauma or bomb blast, only 
parts of the body are found. In all such cases, the 
first effort to be made is to decide whether the 


parts are of a human body or not. It can be done by 
close examination; by chemical test like precipitin 
test with anti-human sera or by anti-globulin 
inhibition test. 

After it is determined that fragments belong to a 
human body, following points should be carefully 
noted: 

1. All the body parts should be arranged in 
anatomical order to find out if they belong 
to more than one person or not. 

2. The nature and character of parts should be 
observed as to how they are separated. It 
should be appreciated whether parts are cut 
or lacerated, or gnawed by animals. 

3. The sex of the individual can be found out 
by facial features, body parts, shape of 
pelvis, external genitalia, bones, soft tissues 
like uterus or prostrate and mammary 
glands. 

4. The probable age can be found out from skull, 
teeth, colour of the hair, secondary sexual 
characteristics and ossification of bones. 

5. Identification of the person may be made 
by facial features, tattoo marks, fingerprints, 
scars and deformities. Height can be 
calculated by measurement of bones. 

6. Time since death should be calculated from 
the decomposition stage of various body 
parts. 


CFMT-05 (3rd Proof).p65 


28 


8/12/07, 9:32 AM 


















Examination of Decomposed and Mutilated Bodies, Skeletal Remains, and Exhumation 29 


7. The cause of death should be determined 
by the presence of injuries on the body. 

8. Identity of an individual can be established 
by Superimposition Technique. In this, a 
life-size photograph of the person is 
superimposed on the skull of the person to 
look for similarities. For this, the skull 
should be cleaned properly with hydrogen 
peroxide solution. Although this technique 
has only corroborative value, it is useful in 
many cases. 

EXAMINATION OF SKELETAL REMAINS 

Sometimes an entire skeleton or, a bundle of bones 
is sent by the police and various questions are raised 
about whether they are of a human or not, what is 
their age, sex and cause of death, etc. The 
examination of bones should proceed in following 
manner: 

1. To determine the bones, whether they are 
of a human being or not, one should have a 
knowledge of the human skeleton and its 
comparison with those of other animals. If 
in doubt, the precipitin test with anti-human 
sera can be done to determine whether bones 
are of a human being or not. 

2. The sex of the skeleton can be determined on 
examination of bones (Table 5.1). If the entire 
skeleton is present, grade (percentage) of 
accuracy of sex determination is 100 per cent. 
If the skull and pelvis are there, it is 98 per 
cent. If pelvis and long bones are there it is 
still 98 per cent. But if pelvis alone is there it 
is 95 per cent. It decreases to 93 per cent if 
skull alone is present. In case of long bones it 
is 85 per cent. Sex determination of bones 
can also be calculated by noting down the 
length and breadth of various bones. 

3. The height of the individual can be estimated 
by keeping the following facts in mind: 

(a) If the complete skeleton is present add 


2.5 cm for soft parts to entire length of 
the skeleton. 

(b) As a general rule, the stature of a person 
is approximately equal to the length 
measured from the tip of the middle 
finger to the tip of the opposite middle 
finger with arms extended horizontally. 

(c) If only one arm is there, height can be 
calculated by multiplying its length by 
two and adding 30 cm for clavicles, and 
4 cm for width of sternum. 

(d) The length of the forearm measured 
from the tip of the olecranon process to 
the tip of the middle finger, is also stated 
to be equal to five-nineteenth of the 
height. 

(e) The length of head is one-eighth of the 
height of the body. 

(f) Symphysis pubis forms the centre of the 
body from 20-25 years of age. 

(g) Height can also be determined by using 
multiplication factors available to the 
length and breadth of various bones. The 
various formulas commonly used are 
Karl Pearson’s, Krogman’s and Trotter 
and Gleser’s formulae. Greater accuracy 
of the height can be ascertained after 
taking sex of the individual, and 
regression formula into consideration. 

4. The age of the individual is determined by 
the presence of teeth, their number, wear 
and tear, presence of centres of ossification 
and their fusion with shaft. The approximate 
age should be given after consideration of 
all these factors. 

5. Sometimes, it is very difficult to determine 
the time since death but the following criteria 
can help: 

(a) Look for fractures and stage of callus 
formation. 

(b) Look for condition of soft parts. Their 
stage of decomposition may give an idea. 

(c) Bones begin to decompose in three to 
four years. 


CFMT-05 (3rd Proof).p65 


29 


8/12/07, 9:32 AM 


















30 Concise Textbook of Forensic Medicine and Toxicology 


Table 5.1 Sex difference in various bones of human skeleton 

Bones 

Male 

Female 

1. Total skeleton weight size 

4.5 kg large 

2.75 kg small 

2. Skull 



Frontal surface 

Irregular 

Smooth 

Orbit 

Rectangular large 

Round and small 

Bony prominence 

More prominent 

Less prominent 

Palate 

U-shaped 

Parabola 

3. Mandible 



Size 

Large 

Small 

Chin 

U-shaped or square 

V-shaped 

Body-ramus angle 

Less obtuse 

More obtuse 

Angle of mandible 

Exerted 

Not much exerted 

Condyles 

Large 

Small 

4. Pelvis 



Inlet 

Heart shaped 

Oval 

Cavity 

Conical and funnel-like 

Broad and round 

Subpubic angle 

V-shaped 

Wide and U-shaped 

5. Hip bones 



Preauricular sulcus 

Faint or absent 

Well marked 

Greater sciatic 

notch Small, narrow and deep 

Large, wide and shallow 

Body of pubis 

Triangular shape 

Square shaped 

Ischial tuberosity 

Inverted 

Everted 

6. Sacrum 



Size 

Large and narrow 

Small and broad 

Length 

More 

Less 

Width 

Less 

More 

Curvature 

Uniform 

Abrupt 

Sacral promontory 

Prominent 

Less prominent 

7. Femur 



Head 

Large 

Small 

Neck-shaft angle 

Wider 

Narrow 

Bicondylar width 

More 

Less 

Bony prominence 

Prominent 

Less prominent 


6. It is difficult to know the cause of death 
from bones unless there are evidences of 
injuries like fractures or cuts. The injuries 
produced by animals by cutting and gnawing 
should be differentiated from injuries 
produced by a sharp-edged weapon, 
otherwise a wrong opinion can be formed. 
Metallic poisons can be detected by chemical 
analysis of bone ash. Poisons that can be 
detected are arsenic, antimony, lead, or 
mercury. 


7. Examination of burnt bones: Sometimes, 
burnt bones are forwarded by the police for 
examination. It should be remembered that 
in a household fire, the temperature usually 
does not go beyond 1200°C which renders 
all bones to ashes. It is only during 
cremation that the temperature goes around 
1600°-1800°C for at least 90 minutes to 
reduce bones into ashes. Even then, some 
bones can be identified. While examining 
burnt bones, a distinction should be made 


CFMT-05 (3rd Proof).p65 


30 


8/12/07, 9:32 AM 





















Examination of Decomposed and Mutilated Bodies, Skeletal Remains, and Exhumation 31 


whether fractures are due to injuries or due 
to heat. When bones, especially long bones 
and skull are exposed to high heat, curved 
fractures may be seen. Even in burnt bones, 
arsenic can be detected on chemical 
examination. 

EXHUMATION 

Sometimes, it is necessary to exhume bodies from 
graves when there may be doubts regarding cause 
of death , some foul play like abortion, or disputed 
bodies. Even in cases of doubtful identification, 
malpractice or insurance claim, exhumation may 
be done. 

Rules 

The exhumation can be done only on the orders of 
the magistrate. Previously, coroners were also 
authorised by law to order exhumation, but since 
the abolition of the coroner system, an exhumation 
can be done only on the orders of the magistrate. It 
should always be done under natural sunlight and 
should not be conducted after sunset. 

Procedure 

For exhuming bodies following steps should be 
taken: 

1. After receiving a written order from the 
magistrate, the doctor should proceed to the 
site immediately. 


2. Before beginning to dig the grave, it should 
be identified by the undertaker or by the 
police. 

3. The grave should now be dug. Condition of 
the coffin should be noted and preferably be 
identified by the person who has made it. 

4. In cases of suspected poisoning, 500 gm of 
earth in actual contact with the body should 
be kept for chemical analysis as control 
sample. 

5. The body should be taken out and post¬ 
mortem examination should begin there 
itself. 

6. Photographs should be taken while all the 
examinations are going on. 

7. The post-mortem should be done away from 
the eyes of people by covering and cordoning 
the area. 

8. The complete post-mortem examination 
should be done to ascertain identification, 
age, time since death and cause of death. 

9. Sample of viscera, hair, nails, etc., may be 
preserved for chemical analysis. 

10. After post-mortem examination, the body 
may be re-kept in the grave for burial. 

11. At no stage should disinfectants be used on 
the body. 

12. The sample of earth taken as control near 
the body should also be forwarded for 
chemical analysis. 

13. In India, there is no time limit prescribed 
for ordering exhumation. In France, it is 
10 years and in Germany it is 30 years. 


CFMT-05 (3rd Proof).p65 


31 


8/12/07, 9:32 AM 


















CHAPTER 

Examination of Biological Stains 
and Hair 


MEDICO-LEGAL IMPORTANCE 

Biological stains and hair carry great medico-legal 
importance. They are usually found at the scene of 
crime and sexual assault cases, and are required to 
be examined to establish identity of the person 
involved in the crime. Examination of biological 
fluids may be required in the following cases also: 

1. Disputed paternity in cases of adultery and 
divorce. 

2. Disputed maternity in cases of kidnappings, 
inheritance, etc. 

3. Exchange of infants at hospitals. 

4. Identification of individuals involved in 
disasters, accidents, etc. 

METHOD 

Examination of Blood 

A fresh sample of blood is taken in cases of 
problems like disputed paternity. Let us first discuss 
various antigen systems by which blood is identified 
into groups: 

1 . Red Cell Antigens: There are various antigens on 
red blood cells by which group of blood can be 
identified, common being ABO, MNS, Rh system, 
etc. 

(a) ABO group: There are four basic blood 
groups: A, B, AB and O. There are three 


allelic genes A, B, and O. Each child inherits 
one gene from one parent. The possible 
phenotype and genotype expression of 
the four blood groups are enumerated in 
Table 6.1. 


Table 6.1 Expression of blood groups 



Phenotype 

Genotype 

Antigen 

present 

Antibodies 

in serum 

1 . 

A 

AA 

A 

Anti-B 



AO 



2. 

B 

BB 

B 

Anti-A 



BO 



3. 

AB 

AB 

A and B 

None 

4. 

O 

OO 

None 

Anti-A 





and anti-B 


Antigens of ABO system can be detected even 
in an unborn child. The antigen in ABO groups are 
detected by using anti-A, anti-B and anti-0 sera. 
In India, B group is the most common. A person 
with AB group is a universal recipient while one 
with O group is a universal donor. 

(b) MNS system: It was discovered by 
Landsteiner and Levine. There are four red 
cell antigens namely, M, N, S and s. These 
antigens are inherited as dominant Mendelian 
factors. A child can inherit either M or N, 
and S or s from each parent. Various 
phenotypes and genotypes possible are listed 
in Table 6.2 and help in exclusion of paternity. 


CFMT-06 (3rd Proof).p65 


32 


8/12/07, 9:32 AM 





















Examination of Biological Stains and Hair 33 


Table 6.2 MINIS group 



Genotypes 

Phenotypes 

1 . 

MS/MS 

MS 

2. 

MS/Ms 

MSs 

3. 

Ms/Ms 

Ms 

4. 

MS/NS 

MNS 

5. 

Ms/NS 

MNs 

6. 

Ms/Ns 

MNs 

7. 

NS/NS 

NS 

8. 

Ns/NS 

NSs 

9. 

Ns/Ns 

NS 


(c) The Rh system: This system consists 
mainly of five antigens D, C, E, c and e. 
Since antibodies were obtained by 
depositing Rhesus monkey blood in rabbits 
and guinea pigs, it was called Rh system. 
In clinical practice, mainly D antigen is used 
for blood transfusion. Those who have D 
antigen are called Rh +ve while the rest are 
called Rh -ve. In India, 85 per cent of 
population is Rh +ve. Various phenotype 
and genotype combinations are possible 
with other antigens by which exclusion of 
paternity can be done. 

(d) Other system: Besides ABO, MNs and Rh, 
there are other systems for examination also 
like Kell system, Duffy system, Kidd 
system, Lutheran system, P system, Xg 
system, Cotton and Yt system, which can 
also be used. But nowadays, they are rarely 
used in view of recent techniques. 

2. White Cell Antigens: HLA system (human 
leucocyte antigen system) - These antigens are 
present on white blood cells and consist of 68 
factors which are now classified into four loci, A, 
B, C and D. Individual alleles of each locus and its 
antigen were designated by numbers following the 
designation of the locus, like HLA-A10, HLA- 
B27. The genes of the system are inherited as 
codominant Mendelian characters. The child gets 
four genes each from each parent. Four genes 
inherited from one parent are called haplotype and 
one genotype contains two haplotypes. There are 


more than 200 haplotypes or 60,000 genotypes 
recognisable even with the use of two loci. So, there 
is a wide range of differentiation for inclusion or 
exclusion in paternity cases. HLA system is very 
superior as compared to other systems, and up to 
98 per cent exclusion can be possible with this 
system. HLA system is widely used in transpl¬ 
antation procedures to identify the correct and the 
most suitable donor. 

3. Serum Allotypes: There are differences in serum 
proteins in humans. Various proteins give patterns 
which are called allotypes consisting of allomers 
(genetically controlled) and allomorphs (genetically 
not controlled). Based on these differences in serum 
proteins, various systems like Gm, Km, 
haptoglobin, Gc, Ag, Lp, Xm, albumins, and 
transferrins were found which can help in cases of 
disputed paternity. 

4. Red Cell Enzymes: Erythrocyte acid phosphates 
(EAP) system, Adenylate kinase (AK) system, 
adenosine deaminase (ABA) system, phospho- 
glucomutase(PGM) system, 6-phosphogluconate 
dehydrogenase (6-PGD) system, esterase D (ESD) 
system, and glyoxalase (GLO) system are the few 
isoenzyme systems that have been developed for 
disputed paternity testing. 

Examination of Blood Stains 

Blood stains can be found on soil, clothes, body or 
any other place. It may be mixed with other body 
fluids. The blood stain has to be carefully lifted. 
Take a sample to laboratory, if possible. If it is not 
possible, sample may be lifted with a moist cotton 
and transferred to a slide. The first step in 
examination of a blood stain is to verify if it is a 
blood stain or not. Blood is identified by the 
presence of haemoglobin in red blood cell or serum 
proteins. 

Tests for Identifying Blood 

The tests of blood are as follows: 

1 . Screening Tests for Blood: These tests are based 


CFMT-06 (3rd Proof).p65 


33 


8/12/07, 9:32 AM 





















34 Concise Textbook of Forensic Medicine and Toxicology 


on the presence of peroxidase enzyme activity of 
haemoglobin which releases nascent oxygen from 
hydrogen peroxide when added to it. This nascent 
oxygen changes colour of the reagent added. 

Benzidine test: In this, benzidine solution is 
added along with hydrogen peroxide, an intense 
blue colour in seen if blood is present. 

2. Kastle-Mayer test: In this, phenolphthalin is 
added instead of Benzidine, pink colour is seen if 
blood is present. 

Benzidine test is very sensitive as it can detect 
blood in 1 in 1,000,000 dilutions. Phenolphthalin 
test is more specific, but less sensitive. 

A negative test while screening may rule out 
the presence of blood but there may be a false 
positive test also. Some vegetable stains, salivary 
stain, rust or pus may give a positive test. 

Confirmatory Tests for Blood 

The following are the confirmatory tests for blood: 

1. Microscopic Examination: It is very good 
for fresh blood as it can identify the presence 
whether that of red blood cells or of white 
cells, under the microscope. In cases where 
only stain is present, a stain extract is made 
and then it is examined under microscope 
for blood cells. Staining of the stain extract 
with Leishman stain is useful as sex of the 
deceased can be found out by counting 
Davidson bodies in polymorph cells. 

2. Crystal Test: This test is based on the 
property of iron in the haemoglobin to form 
characteristic coloured crystals with certain 
reagents. These crystals can be easily seen 
under a microscope. In haemochromogen 
crystal test, pink feathery crystals can be 
seen. In haemin crystal test, dark brown 
rhomboid crystals can be seen. Sometimes, 
false negative tests can also be seen if stain 
is contaminated or it is very old. 

3 . Spectroscopic Examination: This is a very 
reliable test. In this, absorption spectra of 
stain is prepared and compared with 


absorption spectra of haemoglobin and its 
derivatives. 

4. Chromatographic Tests: It can be on paper 
or silica gel thin layer chromatography, and 
compared with standard tests. 

5. Electrophoretic Tests: Electrophoresis of 
stain extract can be carried out on agar gel 
for separation of haemoglobin or serum 
protein. Haemoglobin can be tested by 
screening test and serum proteins by 
immunoelectrophoresis. 

Species Identification 

Once it is identified as a blood stain, next step is to 
identify whether it is of human or animal origin. It 
is done by precipitin test. 

Precipitin Test 

It is based on antigen-antibody reaction. Antihuman 
serum is obtained by injecting human serum in 
rabbits. Stain extract is prepared and treated with 
anti-human sera. A positive reaction is obtained by 
precipitation and a ring is observed. This is a very 
specific test and quite reliable. Other tests which 
can also be used for species identification are gel 
diffusion, precipitin electrophoresis, isoenzyme 
methods and anti-globulin consumption test. 

Age of Stain 

The fresh blood stain is bright red and, is moist 
and sticky. In 24 hours, its colour changes to reddish 
brown. After 24 hours it becomes dark brown. After 
passage of weeks it may look black. 

Whether Stain is Caused by Ante-mortem or 
Post-mortem Blood 

Since clotting is observed in ante-mortem blood 
only, a fibrinous network due to clot formation can 
be seen in stains due to ante-mortem blood. This 
clot formation and fibrinous network would be 
absent in stain due to post-mortem blood. 


CFMT-06 (3rd Proof).p65 


34 


8/12/07, 9:32 AM 


















Examination of Biological Stains and Hair 35 


Examination of Seminal Stains 

Seminal stains are important next only to blood 
stain. Seminal stains are seen in sexual offences 
like rape, sodomy, bestiality, etc. 

1. Visual Examination: Seminal stains may 
be seen on undergarments of victim/ 
accused in case of rape, or on other clothings 
like salwar, shirt, etc. On visual examination 
they appear as translucent or opaque spots 
and a bit stiff on clothes where absorption 
of semen can be there. If these stains are 
seen under ultraviolet light, they appear 
fluorescent. In fresh sample, characteristic 
disagreeable smell can be appreciated. 

2. Microscopic Examination: The puipose of 
microscopic examination is to detect 
spermatozoa. This is very useful in cases of 
fresh stains as parts of spermatozoa can be 
appreciated easily. First, the seminal stain 
is treated with hydrochloric acid and water, 
and then the extract is transferred to 
microscope slides. The slides are stained 
with haematoxylin and eosin, and then 
examined under microscope to look for 
spermatozoa. If spermatozoa are seen, this 
is a confirmatory test. 

3. Chemical Tests: The following are the 
chemical tests usually employed: 

(a) Florence test: A portion of the seminal 
stain is treated with hydrochloric acid 
and water to make extract, which is then 
transferred to a microscope slide. A drop 
of reagent comprising potassium iodide 
is put on slide and allowed to mix slowly. 
Dark brown crystals of choline periodide 
which are needle shaped, can be seen 
within a few minutes. 

(b) Acid phosphatase spot test: A seminal 
stain extract is made and placed in a 
cavity of porcelain tile. It is then treated 
with solution of disodium phenyl 
phosphate. After enzymatic reaction by 


acid phosphatase present in seminal 
stain, phenol is liberated which is 
detected by adding solution of phenol 
reagent and sodium carbonate. Blue 
colour develops within 10 minutes 
indicating presence of acid phosphate in 
the stain. 

(c) LDH isoenzyme method to detect 
spermatozoa: In this, LDH isoenzyme 
bands are made which give specific 
biochemical reaction to spermatozoa. 
This test is very useful when seminal 
stain is mixed with other stains like 
saliva, vaginal fluid, etc. 

(d) Acid phosphatase isoenzyme method: 
This method is very specific for semen 
discharge where spermatozoa are absent 
due to oligospermia, azoospermia and 
vasectomised individuals. Even in 
normal cases this method is quite useful. 

(e) Zinc test: The concentration of zinc in 
semen is unusually high. Some reagents 
like pyridylazonaphthol (PAN) which 
gives bright coloured product with zinc 
in semen can be used to identify semen. 
Even zinc can be quantitatively assessed 
by atomic absorption spectrometer in 
laboratory. This test is quite useful even 
in old samples as zinc degrades slowly. 

(f) Barberio’s test: A prostatic gland 
secretion, spermine is present in the 
semen which can be detected with picric 
acid with which it forms yellow needle- 
shaped crystals of spermine pi crate. 

OTHER TESTS 

Besides the aforementioned tests, other tests used 
for examining seminal stains are as follows: 

1. Electrophoresis: By electrophoresis, acid 
phosphatase and LDH-X isoenzyme of 
semen can be separated by polyacrylamide 
gel electrophoresis and hence confirmation 
of semen can be done. 


CFMT-06 (3rd Proof).p65 


35 


8/12/07, 9:32 AM 


















36 Concise Textbook of Forensic Medicin e and Toxicology 


2. Immunological Methods: Specific 
antigens present in human seminal plasma 
which are called ‘sperm coating antigen’ 
can be detected on sperm cells and in the 
ejaculated fluid by immunological methods. 
The common antigens are P-30 (prostate- 
specific antigen)/MHS-5 (comes from 
epithelial cells of seminal vesicles). Such 
antigens can be detected by immunological 
tests like immunodiffusion, enzyme-linked 
immunosorbent assay (ELISA) and other 
tests. 

Identification of Species of Seminal Stain 

This is very essential in cases where bestiality is alleged, 
as semen may be mixed with other body fluids of 
animals. The species identification can be done by : 

1 . Microscopic Method: The spermatozoa of 
human being can be easily differentiated 
from animal spermatozoa. 

2. LDH Isoenzyme Method: Specific 
bioenzyme bonds made in this system give 
different patterns in animals and humans, 
and thus offer a method for differentiation. 

3. Immunological Method: The precipitin 
test with anti-human serum can be 
effectively used for seminal stains too, as it 
is used for blood stains. 

Individual Identification of Seminal Stains 

The seminal stains can be subjected to group tests 
like ABO, Rh, MNS, etc. similar to that done for 
blood stains to identify a person. DNA finger¬ 
printing can be done easily from spermatozoa 
present and their identity can be established easily. 

Examination of Salivary Stains 

Saliva is a secretion from the salivary gland which 
contains enzymes like ptyalin (alpha amylase), 
glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase, along with 
lipids, chlorides, etc. Salivary stains may be seen 
in sexual offences on various parts of human body 
like breasts, face, vagina, etc. In other crime 


conditions it may be present on cigarette bits, cigars, 
etc. The detection of saliva is based on the presence 
of amylase. In the test, stain extract is brought into 
contact with starch, which produces reducing 
sugars which, in turn, are identified by using silver 
nitrate or triphenyl tetrazolium chloride reagents. 
The detection of species, and individual 
identification by various ABO grouping can be 
done on blood stains and seminal stains. 

Examination of Hair and Fibre 

Hair and fibre are commonly found in cases of 
assaults, sexual offences, bestiality, etc. They may 
be found on human body or at the scene of crime. 

Anatomy of Hair 

Hair comprises mainly two parts— shaft is the part 
above the skin, and root lies below the skin. The 
root has a bulb as a base, embedded in hair follicle. 
The cuticular scales cover the shaft. The shaft has 
two layers : outer one is called cortex, and the inner 
one medulla. Pigment of hair are present in the 
cortex. The cuticular scales present around the 
cortex are non-nucleated cells originating from 
follicle, and goes for keratinisation. The medulla 
consists of cylinder-like cells produced by matrix 
cells. The ratio of medullary diameter to that of the 
shaft is known as medullary index. The medullary 
column is present in the centre of the cortex. 

The pigment granules present in the cortex 
consist of melanin. It is made up of several units of 
monomer, consisting of indole and quinone. It 
contains amino acids like dihydroxyphenylalanine 
and tyrosine. The medullary cells contain large 
amount of glycogen. 

Examination of Hair 

Macroscopic and microscopic examination of hair 
is done in the laboratory, to distinguish it from fibre 
and to ascertain whether the hair is of a human 
hair or an animal. Salient features to distinguish 
animal hair and human hair are presented in 
Table 6.3. 


CFMT-06 (3rd Proof).p65 


36 


8/12/07, 9:32 AM 


















Examination of Biological Stains and Hair 37 


Table 6.3 Differences between human and animal hair 


Features 

Human hair 

Animal hair 

l. 

Cuticular scales 

Small, flattened and have 
irregular margins 

Large, projecting and various patterns seen 

2. 

Medulla 

Very small, fragmented or 

May be continuous or discontinuous, 



discontinuous, even may be 

patterns may be seen. Diameter more than 



absent. Diameter is less than 

1/3 of shaft diameter 

half of shaft diameter 

3. 

Shaft 

Diameter ranges 50-150 micron 

More than 300 microns, in some cases even 
less than 25 microns 

4. 

Pigment 

Evenly distributed, sometimes 

May be absent. If present, mostly near 



rarely absent 

medulla 


Once it is identified that it is a human hair, 
effort can be made to find out to which area of the 
body it belongs to. The characteristics like length, 
shaft diameter, medullary index, shape of cross- 
section, etc. are helpful in finding the site of hair 
(Table 6.3). 


Examination of Fibres 

Various fibres may be found as physical evidence 
at the scene of crime. During struggle, a victim may 
be able to catch some fibres from the clothes of the 
person assaulting him. Such fibres can be examined 
in the laboratory and comparison may be made with 
the clothes seized from the person who assaulted. 


CFMT-06 (3rd Proof).p65 


37 


8/12/07, 9:32 AM 





















CHAPTER 

Medico-legal Aspects of Death 


DEFINITION 

Death is defined as irreversible cessation of life. It 
is classified as somatic and molecular. When the 
three tripods, brain, lung and heart stop completely, 
it is called somatic death. Molecular death occurs 
about 3-4 hours after somatic death when the 
individual cells and tissues start dying and the 
decomposition signs start showing. 

MODES OF DEATH 

There are three modes of deaths: 

1. Coma 

2. Syncope 

3. Asphyxia 

Coma 

When death results primarily from the failures of 
the vital centres of the brain, mode of death is called 
‘coma’. The following are the causes of coma: 

1. Compression of vital centres as a result of 
effusion of blood in cranial cavity due to 
injuries, or diseases like hypertension or 
rupture of aneurysm, etc. 

2. Depression of vital centres of brain as a 
result of centrally acting poisons as opium, 
barbiturates, alcohol, carbolic acid, etc. 

3. Vital centres of the brain may be affected 
in other conditions like epilepsy, uraemia, 
hepatic coma, heatstroke, hypothermia etc. 


In coma, a person becomes unconscious and 
lose all reflexes and slowly, as a result of depression 
of vital centres, respiration and heart beat cease. In 
post-mortem examination, when the skull is opened, 
injuries to the brain can be appreciated. 

Syncope 

When death occurs primarily as a result of heart 
failure, the mode of death is called syncope. It may 
be due to following reason: 

1. Blood loss as a result of sudden and 
excessive haemorrhage due to rupture of 
large blood vessel or internal organs like 
liver, heart, lungs, spleen, etc. It may be 
due to rupture of aortic aneurysm or varicose 
veins. The haemorrhage may be external 
when the blood flows outside the body or 
internal when blood accumulates in the body 
as in a rupture of an organ or fracture of 
long bones like femur, etc. 

2. When heart failure occurs as a result of 
power loss of the muscle of the heart as in 
myocardial infarction, myocarditis or 
cardiomyopathies, etc. 

3. Inhibition of heart action may be due to 
neurogenic shock precipitated by a sudden 
blow on the head, epigastrium, scrotum, etc. 
It may be due to sudden fright, embolism 
or sudden pressure on carotid sinuses. The 
heart may stop suddenly on drinking a large 
quantity of cold water in a heated condition. 


CFMT-07 (3rd Proof).p65 


38 


8/16/07, 11:03 AM 



















Medico-legal Aspects of Death 39 


On clinical examination, there would be 
pallor on the face, the heart beat faster but 
weak and the respiratory rate higher but 
shallow. Slowly, the person becomes 
unconscious and dies. 

On post-mortem examination, the body would 
be pale in colour. The heart would be contracted 
and chambers empty. All the organs would be pale. 

Asphyxia 

When the respiratory function of lungs stops as a 
result of lack of oxygen, it causes failure of heart 
and brain as a result of oxygen deprivation. This 
mode of death is called asphyxia. Asphyxia can be 
due to: 

1. Mechanical obstruction to air passage like 
impaction of foreign bodies, bronchospasm, 
suffocation, drowning, etc. There may be 
external pressure to close air passages like 
hanging, strangulation, smothering, etc. 

2. At higher altitude where oxygen is deficient. 

3. In poisoning as with cyanide, there is 
interference in utilisation of oxygen at 
cellular level. 

4. Penetrating injuries of the chest which causes 
the collapse of lungs or chest muscles. 

5. Pulmonary embolism, tetanus and cold 
causes asphyxia. 

6. Poisons such as strychnine, barbiturates and 
opium. 

Clinical Features of Asphyxia 

There are three stages of asphyxia: 

1. Stage of inspiratory dyspnoea is when the 
person is not able to take air inside, causing 
anxiety, heaviness in head and ringing in 
ears. The lips become livid, eyes get 
prominent, blood pressure rises and 
consciousness is lost within one minute. 

2. Stage of expiratory dyspnoea is caused by 
accumulation of carbon dioxide and lack of 
oxygen causing faster respiratory rate, 
convulsions and relaxation of sphincters. 


Hands and feet become cyanosed. As a result 
of increased capillary permeability, there is 
exudation of fluid in lungs and mouth. This 
stage lasts for 1-2 minutes and as a result 
of increased sympathetic and parasymp¬ 
athetic activity, there is increased salivation, 
increased heart rate and gastrointestinal 
motility. Urine, stool and semen may be 
passed out. 

3. The stage of exhaustion and respiratory 
failure lasts for about 2-3 minutes. It is 
marked by failure of the respiratory and 
nervous centres, leading to brain damage. 
The respiratory action stops although the 
heart may beat for 10-15 minutes more. 
Finally, heart also stops. 

Post-mortem Appearance of Death by 
Asphyxia 

Externally, the face is congested. The lips 
and nails are livid. Tongue is protruded and 
may be bitten. Saliva may be seen oozing 
out of the mouth. In hanging, cadaveric 
lividity is more marked. 

Internally, the mucous membranes of 
the trachea and larynx would be congested 
and may contain froth. The lungs would be 
dark and purple in colour and, on cutting 
section, exude frothy blood. The right cavity 
of the heart is found to be full; left cavity 
empty. The brain is congested and blood is 
dark coloured. Numerous small petechial 
haemorrhages commonly called Tardieu’s, 
spots are seen under the serous membranes 
of various organs, due to rupture of 
capillaries caused as a result of increased 
pressure in them. These are usually round, 
small, multiple and their size varies from 
pinhead to small pea. They are usually found 
under pleural viscera, pericardium, 
endocardium, thymus, meninges, 
conjunctivae and epiglottis. They are also 
seen in other conditions like bleeding 
disorders such as purpura, bacterial 
endocarditis or coronary thrombosis. 


CFMT-07 (3rd Proof).p65 


39 


8/16/07, 11:03 AM 


















40 Concise Textbook of Forensic Medicine and Toxicology 


GORDON’S CLASSIFICATION OF DEATH 

This classification is based on the concept of tissue 
anoxia which brings up death. These may be of the 
following kinds: 


these deaths occur by natural causes but obvious 
etiology is not known at that time. All such cases 
which are brought before a doctor should not be 
certified as a natural one, till all the other causes like 
trauma, poisoning or assault have been ruled out. 


1. Anoxic Anoxia: It is produced as a result 
of: 

(a) Obstruction in the passage of air into 
respiratory tract, e.g. in suffocation, 
smothering, etc. 

(b) Obstruction in the passage of air into 
respiratory tract due to foreign body, 
choking, drowning, throttling, hanging, 
strangulation, etc. 

(c) By external pressure on chest wall, e.g. 
falling under debris of earth, earthquake, 
road traffic accident, etc. 

(d) Respiratory centre failure as a result of 
narcotic poisoning like alcohol, opium, 
barbiturates, etc., and electric injuries. 

(e) By breathing in an atmosphere 
containing inert gases or other gases. 

2. Anaemic Anoxia: It is due to reduced 
oxygen-carrying capacity of blood due to 
acute poisoning of carbon monoxide, 
chlorate, nitrates, etc. 

3. Histotoxic Anoxia: It is due to depression 
of oxidative processes in tissue, like in acute 
cyanide poisoning. 

4. Stagnant Anoxia: It is due to inefficient 
circulation of blood due to traumatic shock, 
heatstroke, acute irritant and corrosive 
poisoning. 

All these types of anoxia produce circulatory 
failure leading to death. 

SUDDEN DEATH 

If a person dies within 24 hours without suffering 
from a recognisable cause, the likely reason for death, 
his death would be called a ‘sudden death’. Most of 


Causes 

The natural causes of death are: 

1. Diseases of Cardiovascular System: 

These constitute the majority of sudden 
death like myocardial infarction, 
hypertension, acute myocarditis due to 
infections like enteric, diphtheria, 
ischaemic heart disease, sub-acute bacterial 
endocarditis, rupture of aneurysm, angina, 
left ventricular failure, congenital 
abnormalities like Fallot’s tetralogy or 
patent ductus arteriosus, occlusion of 
coronary arteries due to thrombosis/ 
embolism or atherosclerosis, right 
ventricular failure due to lung diseases, 
cardiomyopathies, etc. (Fig. 7.1). 

2. Diseases of Respiratory System: Diseases 
producing asphyxia like acute oedema of 



Fig. 7.1 Common sites of occlusion in coronary arteries. 


CFMT-07 (3rd Proof).p65 


40 


8/16/07, 11:03 AM 




















Medico-legal Aspects of Death 41 


glottis, membrane deposit in larynx or 
tumour pressing on trachea, spasm of vocal 
cords, etc. can result in sudden death. Other 
respiratory reasons are air embolism, 
rupture of emphysematous bullae or tubular 
cavity, haemothorax, pneumothorax, 
hydrothorax, carcinoma of lung, asthma, 
pneumonia, acute bronchitis, and acute 
regurgitation of stomach content into lungs 
in comatose conditions, etc. 

3 . Diseases of Alimentary System: It includes 
hematemesis due to oesophageal varices, 
peptic ulcer, carcinoma of stomach or 
oesophagus, perforation of peptic ulcer, 
peritonitis, acute gastroenteritis, acute 
pancreatitis, bursting of liver abscess, 
rupture of enlarged spleen, strangulated 
hernia, obstructive cholecystitis, drinking 
of a large quantity of water in heated 
condition, etc. 



Fig. 7.2 Circle of Willis and frequent sites of aneurysm. 


4. Diseases of Central Nervous System (CNS): 

Hypertension or atherosclerosis causing 
haemorrhage in various parts of the brain 
like cerebrum, pons, or internal capsule is 
the leading cause of sudden death due to 
diseases of the central nervous system. Other 
causes are brain abscess, acute meningitis, 
tuberculoma, encephalitis due to bacterial 
or viral infections, encephalopathies, 
epilepsy or brain tumours (Fig. 7.2). 

5. Diseases of Genitourinary System: 
Prominent diseases include rupture of 
bladder due to enlarged prostrate, stricture 
of urethra or malignancy, acute or chronic 
renal failure due to diseases, electrolyte 
imbalance, renal diseases, tumours, uterine 
haemorrhages due to tumours like fibroid 
or malignant tumours, etc. 

6. Systemic Diseases: Bleeding disorders, 
diabetes mellitus, Addison disease, cerebral 
malaria, convulsions, etc. can cause sudden 
death. 

7. Sudden fright, emotional stress can 
precipitate neurogenic shock or induce 
myocardial infarction leading to death. 

8. Some diagnostic or therapeutic procedures 
may induce syncope which may lead to death; 
common procedures are lumbar puncture, 
vaginal examination, catheterisation of 
distended bladder, drainage of fluids from 
pleural or pericardial cavities, etc. 

9. Reflex inhibition of vagus may occur due 
to sudden impaction of foreign body in 
larynx. 

The most common cause of sudden death in 
India is myocardial infarction. It becomes difficult 
for autopsy surgeon to determine the cause of death 
in such cases if death occurs immediately. The 
changes which can be appreciated with time in 
gross features and microscopic examination are 
described below to pinpoint cause of death as 
myocardial infarction (Table 7.1). 


CFMT-07 (3rd Proof).p65 


41 


8/16/07, 11:03 AM 























42 Concise Textbook of Forensic Medicine and Toxicology 


Table 7.1 Changes with time in myocardial infarction 


Time 

Gross features 

Microscopic examination 

0-4 hours 

None 

None 

4-6 hours 

Pallor is seen 

Hyalinisation, loss of striations, and eosinophilia 
is seen 

6-9 hours 

Tigroid appearance of the 

area looks pale or brownish purple 

Necrosis with leukocytic infiltration 

9-24 hours 

Necrosed region shows yellow border 
with hyperemia around border 

Advanced necrosis. Leukocytic infiltration seen 

2-4 days 

Necrosed area with yellow border 
which is dry and firm 

Marked infiltration of neutrophils with advanced 
necrosis 

5-6 days 

Yellow area becomes broader 

Macrophages appear. Removal of necrotic material 
seen 

7 th day 

Whole area becomes yellow 

Fibroblasts and capillaries start coming in the area. 
Phagocytosis of muscle fibres begins 

2nd Week 

Periphery appears red 

Macrophages start removing dead tissue. Collagen 
found in periphery. Small infarcts heal completely 

3rd Week 

Pale grey 

Dead tissue removal continues. Collagen becomes 
prominent. Eosinophils start decreasing 

4-8 weeks 

Scarring seen as grey or grey-white 

Collagen increased, vascularity decreased 
Eosinophils begin to disappear 


Some enzymes studies are also useful. The 
levels of maleic dehydrogenase (MDH), lactic 
dehydrogenase (LDH) and succinic dehydrogenase 
(SDH) are quite important. Triphenyl tetrazolium 
chloride (TTC) reaction is most important and 
reliable to establish death due to myocardial 
infarction. 

SIGNS OF DEATH 

They may be classified as follows: 

A. Immediate Changes 

Permanent cessation of circulation and respi¬ 
ration. 

B. Early Changes 

1. Changes in eye 

2. Changes in skin 

3. Cooling of body 

4. Post-mortem staining 

C. Late Changes 

1. Rigor mortis 

2. Putrefaction 

3. Adipocere 

4. Mummification. 


Immediate Changes 

Permanent Cessation of Circulation and 
Respiration 

Ordinarily, after death there is permanent cessation 
of circulation and respiration. This is usually 
ascertained by examination with stethoscope when 
one cannot hear any breath sounds or heart beat. 
Ordinarily, life is not compatible if there is no 
respiratory or heart beat for more than 5 minutes. 
In the hospital usually 5 minutes of flat ECG line 
is considered as stoppage of circulation. 

But in some cases, a person may be in 
suspended animation where respiratory and 
circulatory activity may be at such low pace that it 
cannot be detected by stethoscope. Such a stage is 
seen in trance, yoga, hysteria, epilepsy, cholera, 
drowning, electrocution, tetanus, cold exposure, 
poisoning by narcotics, surgical shock and 
anaesthesia. In such cases, a person can be revived 
by artificial ventilation and cardiac massage. Some 
animals like frogs go for such stage for a longer 
time and it is called ‘hibernation’. So, to be sure, 
one has to apply the following tests to know if 
circulation has stopped or not: 


CFMT-07 (3rd Proof).p65 


42 


8/16/07, 11:03 AM 





















Medico-legal Aspects of Death 43 


1. Magnus Test: A ligature is tightly applied 
around the base of finger sufficient to cut 
venous flow but not arterial flow. The finger 
remains as such if the circulation has ceased. 
While if a person is having circulation, the 
portion beyond ligature becomes blue and 
swollen. 

2. Diaphanous Test: If a person is alive, the 
webs of fingers appear very red and 
translucent if the hand is held in front of 
light with fingers abducted. But it appears 
yellow and opaque after death. But in carbon 
monoxide poisoning it may appear red, and 
yellow in anaemia. 

3. Icard’s Test: In this, a solution of 
fluorescein dye is injected into hypodermis. 
It produces discolouration of skin only if 
the circulation is there, otherwise not. 

4. If the pressure is applied and later withdrawn 
on finger nail, it produces, alternately a 
white and pink colour in live person, 
otherwise not. 

5. If a small artery is cut, there would not be 
flow of blood in jerks if the person is dead. 

6. On application of heat to the skin in a living 
person it produces a true blister with a clear 
red line; in dead persons, red line would be 
absent. 

7. If there is no activity on ECG continuously, 
circulation may be supposed to be stopped. 

The following are the tests for determining 
the stoppage of respiration: 

1. A mirror is held in front of open mouth 
and nostril. If it gets hazy, it means 
respiration is there. This test is more useful 
in cold weather. 

2. If a feather or cotton fibre is kept in front 
of the nostrils, there would be movement 
of this if the person is respiring, otherwise 
not. This test is not much reliable as 
movement may be there due to air current. 

Indian Criteria of Brain Death 

Death has been defined as total and permanent 
cessation of all the vital functions; a state of the 


body showing complete loss of sensibility and 
ability to move in which there is complete cessation 
of functions of the brain, heart and lungs, the so- 
called “tripod of life”, which maintain life and 
health. In majority of cases, death is not an event, 
it is a process; various organs and systems 
supporting the continuation of life fail and 
eventually cease altogether to function, successively 
and at different times. Rarely, death may occur 
instantaneously or near instantaneously as in cases 
of massive trauma. Generally, a dying patient passes 
through the processes of successive organ system 
failure reaching an irreversible state at which brain 
death occurs and this is the point of no return. In 
some cases, brain death does not occur as a result 
of the failure of other organs and systems but as a 
direct result of severe damage to the brain itself. 
Brain death results in cessation of spontaneous 
respiration followed by cardiac arrest within minutes 
due to hypoxia. Whatever the mode of its 
production, brain death represents the stage at which 
a patient is truly dead, because by then, all functions 
of the brain have permanently and irreversibly 
ceased. Since the respiration and heart can be 
artificially maintained even after brain death it is 
necessary that we must define the criteria which 
will identify with certainty the existence of brain 
death. 

The concept of brain death is in consonance 
with scientific findings and is critical for the 
purposes of removal and transplantation of human 
organs. The traditional concept based on cardio¬ 
respiratory failure is scientifically inadequate and 
redefinition is essential for scientific purposes, as 
well as for purposes of facilitating organ 
transplantation. 

During the past few decades, brain-related 
criteria in defining death have gained increasing 
scientific support, statutory recognition and judicial 
approval in many parts of the world. With the 
passage of Transplantation of Human Organs Act, 
1994, India has also given statutory sanction to the 
concept of brain stem death. The act defines the 
“deceased person” as a person in whom permanent 
disappearance of all evidence of life occurs 


CFMT-07 (3rd Proof).p65 


43 


8/16/07, 11:03 AM 


















44 Concise Textbook of Forensic Medicine and Toxicology 


irrespective of the immediate cause, whether brain 
stem death or cardio-pulmonary arrest any time 
after live birth has taken place. Brain stem death 
has been defined as the stage at which all functions 
of the brain stem have permanently and irreversibly 
ceased. The brain stem death has to be certified by 
a board of medical experts consisting of the 
following: 

1. The registered medical practitioner in charge 
of the hospital in which brain stem death 
has occurred. 

2. An independent registered medical 
practitioner being a specialist to be 
nominated by a registered medical 
practitioner specified in clause (i) from the 
panel of names approved by appropriate 
authority. 

3. A neurologist or a neurosurgeon to be 
nominated by the registered medical 
practitioner specified in clause (i) from the 
panel of names approved by appropriate 
authority. 

4. The registered medical practitioner treating 
the person whose brain stem death has 
occurred. 

Transplantation of Human Organ Act 1994 was 
enacted in July 1994 and notification was issued in 
the Gazette of India on 4 February 1995. With this 
notification the concept of brain stem death has 
became operational. According to the Act there 
are certain preconditions which must be fulfilled 
before certifying brain stem death or brain death. 
These are: 

1. The cause of irreversible brain damage 
(whether accident or illness) producing non- 
responsive coma must be clearly established. 

2. The following reversible causes of coma 
must be excluded. 

(a) Intoxication (alcohol). 

(b) Depressant drugs such as barbiturates, 
benzodiazepines, meprobamate and 
methaqualone, etc. 


(c) Muscle relaxants (neuromuscular 
blocking agent), e.g. succinylcholine. 

(d) Primary hypothermia. 

(e) Hypovolaemic shock. 

(f) Metabolic or endocrine disorders. 

The patient must be examined by a board of 
medical experts twice at an interval of 6 hours and 
brain stem death will be declared only after 
observing the following points: 

1. Coma—the person is comatose and not 
responding to any painful stimuli. 

2. Absence of spontaneous breathing. 

3. Pupillary size—bilaterally dilated and fixed. 

4. Pupillary light reflex—absent. 

5. Comeal reflexes (both sides)—absent. 

6. Doll's eye movement—In a brain dead 
person the eyes will move with the head. 

7. Motor response in any cranial nerve 
distribution; any response to stimulation of 
face, limb or trunk; there must not be any 
response in brain dead person. 

8. Gag reflex—must be absent. 

9. Cough (tracheal) reflex—must be absent. 

10. Caloric test: In a normal individual if cold 
and warm water is poured in one ear, the 
eyes will move towards that ear. If there is 
any abnormality in brain stem the eyes will 
not move. 

11. Apnoea test: The patient is given 100 per 
cent oxygen through the respirator for 10 
minutes and then 5 per cent carbon dioxide 
is added to oxygen so that there is a maximal 
stimulus for breathing, followed by passive 
flow of oxygen at the rate of 6 1/minute 
through a fine catheter. This procedure 
allows pC0 2 to rise without hazardous 
hypoxia. Hypercarbia adequately stimulates 
respiratory effort within 30 seconds when 
pC0 2 is greater than 60 mmHg. A 10- 
minute period of apnoea is usually sufficient 
to attain this level of hypercarbia. The 
respirator is disconnected for 10 minutes 
and the patient is observed for any sign of 


CFMT-07 (3rd Proof).p65 


44 


8/16/07, 11:03 AM 


















Medico-legal Aspects of Death 45 


respiratory movement. If there is none, the 
apnoea test is positive. The test is repeated 
after 6 hours. 

The brain stem death certificate has to be signed 
by all the members of the board, and the organs 
from the brain dead person can be removed for use 
for therapeutic purpose after obtaining the necessary 
consent for such removal. 

Death, as defined in the Indian Penal Code 
(Section 46): Death denotes the death of a human 
being unless the contrary appears from context and 
in Registration of Births and Deaths Act 1969 Sec. 
29(B)—as the permanent disappearance of all 
evidence of life at any time after live birth has 
taken place. These definitions are clearly inadequate 
and make the task of the medical practitioner 
extremely precarious and prone to grave legal 
consequences. 

Redefining death in clear and unambiguous 
term and making operational the concept of brain 
stem death, will not only permit transplantation of 
human organs but is also desirable for the following 
reasons: 

1. Medical: 

(a) Discontinuance of treatment. 

(b) For optimal utilisation of scarce hospital 
resources. 

(c) To avoid psychological effects on 
healthcare workers who were looking 
after the deceased. 

(d) Provide legal protection to doctors and 
nurses who are called upon to withdraw 
support system in case of a brain dead 
person. 

2. Legal: For purposes of succession and 
inheritance. 

3. Social Factors: To prevent emotional 
trauma and financial hardship to the members 
of the family of the brain dead person. 

4 . Religious : For performing last religious rites. 

Recognising brain stem death is a step forward 
and is in consonance with modern concept. 


Early Changes 
Changes in Eye 

Immediately after death, corneal reflex is lost and 
the cornea becomes opaque. The pupils react to 
atropine till about an hour after death. The eyes 
appear sunken due to reduction in intra-ocular 
tension. The retinal vessels show fragmentation of 
blood columns immediately after death. There is a 
progressive increase in potassium levels in vitreous 
humour after death and has been correlated by some 
scientists with time since death. 


Changes in Skin 

The dead body assumes a pale colour and ashy white 
appearance as a result of drainage of blood from 
small blood vessels. The skin loses its elasticity 
and does not gape when cut. 


Cooling of Body 


After death, the body starts losing its heat to 
environment and slowly acquires the temperature 
of surroundings. The rate of cooling is not uniform 
but it can give some indication of time since death. 
A rough guess may be made of hours after death 
by following formula: 


Hour 
of time 
since death 


Normal 
temperature 
of the body 
(37°C) 


Rectal 
temperature 
of the 
body 


Rate of fall of 
temperature per hour 
The rate of cooling is also dependent on follow¬ 
ing factors: 


1. Age: The bodies of old people and children 
cool faster than adult bodies. 

2. Condition of Body: Fat and large bodies 
cool slowly due to fat which is a bad 
conductor of heat. 

3. Manner of Death: The bodies of persons 
who were suffering from chronic or wasting 
diseases cool faster than persons dying of 
violent reasons. 

4. Atmosphere: If a body is in open air, it cools 
faster. It also cools faster when in water. 


CFMT-07 (3rd Proof).p65 


45 


8/16/07, 11:03 AM 



















46 Concise Textbook of Forensic Medicine and Toxicology 


Post-mortem Caloricity 

Sometimes, the temperature of a dead body rises 
for about 2 hours after death, it is called post¬ 
mortem caloricity. It is seen in deaths due to 
sunstroke, cholera, brain stem haemorrhages 
especially pontine, yellow fever, rabies, meningitis, 
peritonitis, tetanus, nephritis, poisoning by alcohol 
and strychnine. This is due to various chemical 
changes in the body after death or due to bacterial 
activity in the body. 

Post-mortem Staining 

It is discoloration of skin as a result of 
accumulation of blood into the capillaries and small 
veins in most dependent parts of the body due to 
gravitation. If the body is lying on the back, post¬ 
mortem staining would be seen on posterior aspects 
of head, ear, neck, trunk and limbs except on the 
portion of the body which is in direct contact with 
the ground as weight of the body prevents the 
underlying vessels to be filled up. In cases of 
hanging, if the body has been suspended for a long 
time, the post-mortem staining would be seen on 
front and back of both the legs. The coagulation of 
blood normally starts after 4 hours of death. If the 
body position is shifted within 4 hours the post¬ 
mortem staining would shift. But after 4-6 hours, 
when the blood coagulates, the post-mortem 
staining gets fixed and is not altered even if the 
position of the body is changed. Usual colour of 
post-mortem staining is purple, and it starts 
developing immediately after death as small patches 
which in a normal course of nature in 4-6 hours 
develop on dependent portion. Post-mortem 
staining is well appreciated in fair individuals. 

Sometimes, the colour of post-mortem staining 
may point toward cause of death. In asphyxial 
deaths, the post-mortem staining is bluish violet or 
deep purple while it is cherry red in poisoning due 
to carbon monoxide or hydrocyanic acid. At times, 
in burns or cold, cherry red or darker appearance 
of post-mortem staining is seen. 


In poisoning due to potassium chlorate, 
bichromates, nitrobenzene and aniline the post¬ 
mortem staining is chocolate coloured, while it is 
dark brown in poisoning by phosphorus. 

Post-mortem staining sometimes can be 
confused with the bruises sustained before death. 
By noting following points one can easily 
differentiate between them: 

1. Bruise or contusion can occur on any part 
of the body, may take the shape of the 
weapon, limited in area and involves deeper 
tissues while the post-mortem staining is 
seen on extensive dependent parts of the 
body and involves only superficial layers 
of skin. 

2. Contusion appears to be elevated above the 
skin and edges are not well defined but post¬ 
mortem staining does not appear to be 
elevated and has sharply defined edges. 

3. The colour changes in old contusion may 
be seen while post-mortem staining has 
uniform colour. 

4. The surface of the contusion may be abraded 
in some cases while it is not so in post¬ 
mortem staining. 

5. On being cut, post-mortem staining would 
be seen in superficial layers of skin while 
in contusion it would be in deeper layers of 
skin and even muscles may be involved. In 
microscopic examination, vital reaction 
would be seen in case of contusion while it 
would be absent in post-mortem staining. 

The post-mortem staining also develops in 
internal organs except heart. It may be confused 
with congestion in an organ. It may be remembered 
that post-mortem staining in an organ is irregular 
and is on dependent part while congestion can be 
uniform and is not necessarily on dependent portion. 
Inflammatory reaction would be seen in congestion 
while it is absent in post-mortem staining. The 
mucous membrane in congestion may be abraded 
while it is dull and lustreless in post-mortem staining. 


CFMT-07 (3rd Proof).p65 


46 


8/16/07, 11:03 AM 


















Medico-legal Aspects of Death 47 


Late Changes 
Rigor Mortis 

The muscles of the body passes through following 
phases after death: 

1. Primary Relaxation: Immediately after 
death, muscle tone is lost as a result of which 
the lower jaw falls and there is a decreased 
tension in limbs, ear and all parts of the 
body. This is called ‘primary relaxation’. 
But at this stage muscles show contraction 
when electrical current is passed. The entire 
body becomes flexible. It lasts about 2-4 
hours. 

2. Rigor Mortis or Cadaveric Rigidity: Soon 
after death, ATP (adenosine triphosphate) 
synthesis stops. As a result of which the 
energy which keeps muscles in contraction 
and relaxation phase decreases. The 
voluntary muscles are made of fine fibres 
which are made up of small contractile 
elements called myofibrils. In myofibrils 
there are two portions called ‘actin’ and 
‘myosin’ responsible for the contraction and 
relaxation of muscles. Once there is a 
decreased ATP activity, it leads to fusion 
of actin and myosin elements and it causes 
muscles to contract permanently resulting 
in stiffening in muscles. This stiffening is 
called ‘rigor mortis’ or ‘cadaveric rigidity’. 

As a result of stiffening, joints become rigid 
and it is very difficult to make movement at the 
joints. The body becomes so stiff that it can be 
kept on a small stool in prone position. 

The rigor mortis follows a definite course. It 
starts first in muscles of eyelids, muscles of the 
back of neck and lower jaw, front of neck, face, 
chest, and upper extremities and then progresses to 
muscles of the abdomen and lower extremities. It 
passes off in the same sequence as it has appeared. 
The small muscles of the finger and toes are last 
affected by rigor mortis. 

Time of onset of rigor mortis is variable. In 
summer it may take 1-4 hours to develop while in 


winter it may take 3-6 hours to appear. The 
progress of rigor mortis is also variable according 
to weather conditions. Normally, it takes about 12- 
18 hours to develop completely and it remains on 
the body for about the same duration. In the next 
12-18 hours, it disappears. So, usual duration of 
rigor mortis is 36-54 hours. 

In cases where death has occurred from 
exhaustion, or prolonged illnesses, rigor mortis 
develops earlier and disappears; while in deaths 
due to asphyxia, apoplexy, nervous diseases, its 
onset is slow. In cases of strychnine and other spinal 
poisons, the onset is rapid and duration longer. 

In immature foetus below 7 months, rigor 
mortis does not set in. In children and old people 
onset is feeble but rapid, while in adults it is slow 
but well marked. 

If the atmosphere is dry and cold, the onset is 
slow but duration longer as compared to hot and 
humid atmosphere where onset is fast and duration 
shorter. In drowning, the rigor mortis comes early 
and disappears late. 

The following conditions simulate rigor mortis: 

1. Heat Stiffening: When the body is exposed 
to a temperature above 50°C, it causes 
coagulation of muscle protein and it results 
in muscles being hard and stiff, and thus 
simulates rigor mortis. Due to intense heat 
as seen in burns, the body assumes an 
attitude commonly called ‘pugilistic 
attitude’ with lower limbs and arm flexed 
and hands clinched. The whole body is 
charred. It is due to shortening of muscles 
as a result of heat. 

2. Cold Stiffening: As a result of exposure 
of the body to extreme cold, solidification 
of body fat produces stiffening of muscles 
resulting in cold stiffening. In infants, the 
skin-folds around the neck may simulate 
ligature mark due to cold exposure. 

3. Cadaveric Spasm: Sometimes, the muscles 
of the body pass directly into a stage of 
contraction after death without passing the 


CFMT-07 (3rd Proof).p65 


47 


8/16/07, 11:03 AM 


















48 Concise Textbook of Forensic Medicine and Toxicology 


normal early phase of relaxation. This is 
called instantaneous rigor or cadaveric 
spasm. It is generally limited to a single 
group of muscles rather involving the whole 
body. This occurs in cases where death has 
occurred at the time when the body was in 
great muscular exertion and mental 
excitement. It is common in situations such 
as that in the battle field, drowning, 
strangulation, suicide, etc. The exact reason 
of cadaveric spasm is not known but excess 
neuronal discharge into particular group of 
muscles before death is cited as one of the 
reasons. Medico-legally, cadaveric spasm 
has great values as presence of weapon, hair, 
weeds, pieces of clothes, etc. found grasped 
in hands may indicate towards the cause of 
death. Cadaveric spasm is an ante-mortem 
phenomenon and cannot be created after 
death. Weapon held in a hand where 
cadaveric spasm is present can be removed 
only with great difficulty. 

3 . Secondary Relaxation: As the rigor mortis 
passes by, the muscles become soft and 
flaccid and do not respond to mechanical 
or electrical stimuli. The signs of 
decomposition start appearing more on the 
body and the body becomes totally relaxed 
and flaccid and can be put in any position 
or posture. 

Putrefaction 

The putrefaction or decomposition or autolysis is 
a sure sign of death. It is brought about by release 
of enzymes after death of cells. These enzymes 
cause digestive action on cells and thus, bring 
autolysis. This autolysis sometimes occurs in sterile 
condition like dead foetus in a womb, where it is 
called ‘maceration’. When this autolysis occurs in 
the open, the bacteria present in the atmosphere 
also invade the organs and cause putrefaction faster. 
Common bacteria which produce putrefaction are 
Clostridium welchii. Bacillus proteus, Bacillus cole 
and a large number of streptococci and 


staphylococci. As a result of these aerobic and 
anaerobic microorganisms, the whole body starts 
putrefying very soon and it is finally reduced to 
inorganic matter in time. The skeletal remains, 
teeth, hair, nail, uterus, prostrate, etc. resist 
putrefaction the most. 

The colour changes and development of foul 
smelling gases are the two characteristic features 
of putrefaction. 

Colour Changes 

The first external evidence of putrefaction is seen 
as greenish discolouration of abdominal skin over 
right iliac fossa and internally it is seen on caecum, 
under surface of liver and other portions of intestine 
close to caecum. It is due to presence of a large 
number of bacteria in the caecum which start their 
activity immediately after death. So, a greenish 
patch on the right iliac fossa may be seen within 
1-2 hours of death especially in the summer months. 

In about 2- 4 hours, cornea becomes white and 
concave. In 12-18 hours, green discoloration 
spreads all over the abdomen and genitalia. Later, 
greenish patches start appearing on chest, neck, 
face, arms and legs. These patches slowly turn to 
dark blue colour. These patches slowly cover the 
whole body. At the same time, superficial veins 
start looking very prominent like purplish red, 
brown or green streaks resembling marble-like 
appearance due to colouring matter of red blood 
cell set free as a result of decomposition. This 
phenomenon is called ‘marbling of veins’. 

Foul Smelling Gases 

As putrefaction has started immediately after death, 
the body starts emitting an unpleasant smell as a 
result of the development of hydrogen sulphide, 
ammonia, carbon dioxide, marsh gas and 
phosphorated hydrogen due to activity of bacteria 
and other microorganisms. In 12-18 hours, the 
abdominal distension is seen as a result of 
accumulation of these gases in abdomen. In 48 


CFMT-07 (3rd Proof).p65 


48 


8/16/07, 11:03 AM 


















Medico-legal Aspects of Death 49 


hours, these gases accumulate in tissues, cavities 
and hollow viscera in high pressure causing bloating 
of the body. As a result, facial features are distorted, 
eyes are forced out and tongue may be protruded. 
Slowly, the facial features become totally 
unrecognisable. The penis and scrotum become 
swollen. These gases form blisters under the skin 
containing reddish coloured fluid. As a result of 
decomposition, the injuries like contusion, abrasion 
and wounds may become unrecognisable and their 
shapes are altered. 

Common flies like house flies are attracted to 
the body and they lay their eggs especially around 
natural orifices and wounds. The eggs hatch into 
maggots or larvae within 24 hours during summer. 
These maggots crawl into the body through natural 
orifices and wounds and start destroying soft tissues. 
These maggots become pupae in 4 or 5 days. In 
next 4 or 5 days they transform into adult flies. So, 
by looking at the different stages of life history of 
flies a rough idea can be made of the time since 
death. 

In 72 hours, rectum and uterus protrude and 
contents are expelled. The hair become loose and 
can be easily pulled out. In 3-5 days, sutures of 
the skull are separated and the brain is drained 
off. The teeth may become loose and fall off 
(Fig. 7.3). 



Fig. 7.3 Body showing putrefaction. 


Colliquative Putrefaction 

In 5-10 days after death, the abdomen bursts open. 
Thorax in children may burst. Slowly the tissues 
become soft, loose and are transformed into 
semifluid, thick black mass. It slowly gets detached 
from bones and the bones are exposed to 
putrefaction. Slowly, cartilages and the bones are 
totally destroyed. It may take 2-5 years for the 
whole body to be completely destroyed. 

Factors Affecting Putrefaction 

The factors that affect putrefaction can be external 
and internal: 

1. External Factors: Putrefaction is fastened 
up in hot weather as compared to cold 
weather. Putrefaction is more if humidity 
is high. If air movements are more, 
putrefaction is more. In water, putrefaction 
is delayed. If the body is buried in damp, 
marshy soil, the putrefaction is more. If the 
body is with clothes on, the putrefaction is 
delayed. 

2. Internal Factors: The bodies of children 
putrefy early as compared to adults. The 
bodies of old people putrefy slowly as 
moisture is less. There is no significant 
variation in putrefaction of male or female 
body. Fat bodies putrefy earlier than thin and 
emaciated bodies. The persons who have died 
due to septicaemia, chronic diseases, gas 
gangrene putrefy faster than healthy persons 
who died because of other reasons. In 
asphyxial deaths putrefaction is faster. But 
in chronic poisoning of arsenic and antimony, 
putrefaction is delayed. In strychnine 
poisoning, putrefaction is delayed. 

Adipocere 

Sometimes, the process of putrefaction is altered 
and is replaced by formation of adipocere, which 
is a waxy looking substance with greasy feel and may 


CFMT-07 (3rd Proof).p65 


49 


8/16/07, 11:03 AM 


















50 Concise Textbook of Forensic Medicine and Toxicology 


Table 7.2 Correlation of the time since death with changes in body 


Time since death 

Changes 

Less than 1 hour 

Warm body, cornea transparent. 

2-3 hours 

Rigor mortis seen on face, some patches of post¬ 
mortem staining seen on back. 

6-8 hours 

Post-mortem staining well developed and fixed. The 
boy is cold and the rigor mortis is present on upper 
parts of body. 

12 hours 

Rigor mortis present all over the body, slight 
discolouration on right iliac fossa of the abdomen. 

12-24 hours 

Rigor mortis present on all over body, post-mortem 
staining on the back and fixed, greenish discolour¬ 
ation of right iliac fossa and abdomen, eggs of flies seen. 

24-36 hours 

Greenish discolouration over chest and abdomen, 
distension of abdomen due to gases, rigor mortis 
starts decreasing. 

36-48 hours 

Marbling, distension of abdomen and thorax, 
maggots present, post-mortem blisters seen. 

3-5 days 

Whole body bloated, face not recognisable, hairs 
and nails can be pulled off, pupae seen over the 
body. 

1 week 

Internal organs reduce to unrecognisable masses due 
to colliquative putrefaction. 

2 weeks 

Soft tissues gone, prostate or uterus still can be 
identifiable. 

1-3 months 

Skeleton starts appearing. 

2-5 years 

Whole body is destroyed. 


be of white or slight yellowish colour. It has got a 
soapy feel and it melts on heating and emits a 
disagreeable smell. Its specific gravity is less, so it 
floats on water. It consists of fatty acids like palmitic, 
oleic, stearic or hydroxy stearic acid. These are 
formed as a result of post-mortem hydrolysis and 
hydrogenation of body fats. The adipocere process 
is initiated by bacteria Clostridium welchii in 
presence of water and bacterial enzyme, and it 
hydrogenates the body fats into fatty acids. 

The adipocere is seen in hot and humid weather 
and is reported in bodies submerged in water, canals, 
marshy areas, etc. It starts in subcutaneous fat and 
spreads to skin, muscles and organs. It starts early 
in body areas where fat is more, e.g. female breasts, 
cheeks, buttocks, etc. It may cover all the areas of 
the body. The adipocere has great medico-legal 
importance. As the facial features are well preserved, 


body can be identified even late. The injuries 
present on the body can be well appreciated. The 
presence of adipocere may tell how the body has 
been disposed off. Time of formation of adipocere 
is quite variable and it depends on the atmospheric 
condition and may range from a few weeks to 
months. It is not necessary that adipocere is to be 
seen all over the body. In majority of cases, only a 
part of the body is involved. 

Mummification 

It is desiccation or drying of the dead body where 
the soft tissues present on the body shrivel up. In 
this condition body retains its natural shape and 
appearance. The skin becomes dry, leathery and is 
adherent to bones, and is dark brown in colour. 
The facial features are preserved. The body smells 


CFMT-07 (3rd Proof).p65 


50 


8/16/07, 11:03 AM 





















Medico-legal Aspects of Death 51 


of old cheese. The internal organs also dry up and 
may blend with each other. Mummification occurs 
in dry and hot areas like the desert, or in shallow 
graves. The time of formation of mummification 
varies according to atmospheric conditions and may 
vary from 3 months to one year. The 
mummification has great medicolegal significance 
as identification of a dead body is possible even 
after years. Even the expression at the time of death 
can also be appreciated. The injuries present on 
the dead body can be appreciated too. The chronic 
arsenic and antimony poisoning facilitate 
mummification in hot and dry condition. 

Some cases have been reported in which 
adipocere and mummification has been seen on the 
same body. 

TIME SINCE DEATH 

A doctor should be able to give time since death 
after conducting post-mortem examination. He 


should consider cooling of the body, post-mortem 
staining, rigor mortis and decomposition. Besides 
these, examining the contents of the stomach, 
intestine and bladders can give some useful points 
(Table 7.2). 

The rate of emptying of stomach and 
identification of food items in the stomach can give 
some idea about the time of death. The stomach 
emptying time depends on many factors like 
consistency of food, as carbohydrate leave stomach 
early, proteins late and fats in the last. The stomach 
emptying time is between 2-6 hours. The food 
items like dal or rice can be identified till 4 hours 
of eating them. 

The presence of urine in bladder may give 
some idea about time since death. The normal urine 
content is about 1.5 litres/day, 50 per cent of which 
occurs during sleep. It is a normal habit of most of 
the people that they empty their bladder before 
going to sleep, so a large full bladder may indicate 
that the person has been killed in the morning. 


CFMT-07 (3rd Proof).p65 


51 


8/16/07, 11:03 AM 


















CHAPTER 

8 

Post-mortem Artefacts 


DEFINITIONS 

Post-mortem artefacts are defined as any changes 
caused, or features introduced in the body after 
death. These are not physiological changes or 
disease processes. 

Ignorance of post-mortem artefacts may lead 
to wrong interpretation of time since death, cause 
of death, manner of death, leading finally to wrong 
investigation and possible, miscarriage of justice. 
Artefacts are classified as: 

Artefacts Due to Decomposition 

Decomposition is the single most important reason 
of post-mortem artefacts. The following are some 
examples: 

1. Swollen lips, nose, eyelids; protrusion of 
tongue and swelling all over the body may 
be interpreted as asphyxial death or body 
being obese. 

2. Dribbling of fluids from the nose and mouth 
due to decomposition may be interpreted as 
haemorrhage inside. 

3. A groove found in the neck in an obese 
person or due to tight garments may be 
falsely interpreted as ligature mark in 
strangulation. 

4. Gas bubbles in blood vessels due to 
decomposition may be perceived as air 
embolism. 

5. Post-mortem separation of sutures in a child 
due to decomposition may be taken as 
fracture. 


6. Peeling of skin due to decomposition may 
be confused with burns. 

7. Marbling of veins may be confused as long 
abrasions. 

8. Splitting of skin may also be confused as 
injuries. 

As a result of decomposition, alcohol and 
cyanide may be found in the body. It may give the 
impression of poisoning. It should be remembered 
that in such cases, alcohol concentration does not 
go above 20 mg per 100 ml of blood and cyanides 
are found in traces only. 

Third Party Artefacts 

These may due to following reasons: 

1. Onslaught of animals, birds and insect on 
the body may produce lot of artefacts. The 
injuries caused by animal bites may be 
mistaken for injuries. Injuries caused by ants 
may be mistaken for abrasions. Presence of 
flies on the wounds may alter their size and 
texture leading to wrong interpretation of 
instruments causing it. 

2. Emergency medical treatment may cause rib 
injuries, contusions and defibrillator marks 
on precordium. It may be mistaken for burns 
or injuries. Intracardiac injection may lead 
to haemopericardium. Gastric contents may 
be aspirated in agonal phenomenon and 
resuscitation may be mistaken. Surgical 
incisions may be misinterpreted as sharp 
injuries. Endotracheal or gastric tubes may 
cause injuries during introduction. 


CFMT-08 (3rd Proof).p65 


52 


8/12/07, 9:33 AM 


















Post-mortem Artefacts 53 


3. Deliberate mutilation: Sometimes, even 
after death, injuries are inflicted which may 
be due to revenge or to confuse investigative 
agencies. In such cases, careful examination 
should be done to know what injuries finally 
led to death. 

4. Artefacts due to embalming: Presence of 
embalming fluid may pose difficulty in 
ascertaining the cause of death in poisoning 
cases. Wounds caused by trocar to introduce 
embalming fluid may be mistaken for 
injuries. 

5. Artefacts during post-mortem exami¬ 
nation: Opening of skull by a saw may 
produce more fractures or enlarge existing 
ones. Pulling of dura mater may cause 
damage to blood vessels. During neck 
dissection, cutting of vessels may cause 
extravasation of blood in tissues which may 
be mistaken as being due to strangulation. 
Liver laceration may occur due to forceful 
handling. While collecting blood samples 
or cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) sample, 
contamination with other fluids may be there. 

Artefacts Due to Environment 

These may appear in the following situations: 

1. Post-mortem burning: In circumstances 
where the body is subjected to high 


temperature as in a desert, the subcutaneous 
fat may become hard and ruptures may be 
seen resembling incised wounds. 

2. Post-mortem corrosion: Dead body 
exposed to corrosives like kerosene, petrol 
or diesel may show chemical injuries. 

3. Post-mortem maceration: If a body has 
been lying in open environment for a long 
time, it may show signs of maceration or 
skeletonization. 

Artefacts Due to Various Other Reasons 

It may be possible in the following circumstances: 

1. Post-mortem staining may be confused with 
haemorrhage. 

2. Due to wrong handling of the body, artefacts 
may be produced. The injuries like abrasion, 
contusion, laceration or fracture may occur. 
Rigor mortis may be broken. 

3. Exhumation may also introduce artefacts. 
Digging tools may cause injury to the body. 
Post-mortem imbibitions of chemicals 
present in the soil may cause wrong 
interpretation on visceral analysis. 

4. Artefacts may be introduced if post-mortem 
is delayed as volatile chemical poisoning may 
not be detected since its concentration falls. 


CFMT-08 (3rd Proof).p65 


53 


8/12/07, 9:33 AM 


















CHAPTER 

wGmUM 

Asphyxial Deaths 


DEFINITION 

The word ‘asphyxia’ means absence of pulsation. 
But in forensic medicine, it means lack of oxygen. 
It may be described as interference with respiration 
due to any cause like mechanical, environmental, or 
toxic. Anoxia refers to complete absence of oxygen. 

CAUSES OF ASPHYXIAL DEATHS 

Deaths caused by asphyxia are broadly classified as: 

1. Hanging 

2. Strangulation 

3. Suffocation 

4. Drowning 

Hanging 

Hanging is defined as death produced by 
suspending the body by the ligature tied around 
the neck. The constricting force producing asphyxia 
in this is the weight of the body, or sometimes only 
a part of the body like head. 

Hanging is of two types: 

1. Typical Hanging: When the body is 
suspended from a high point of suspension 
and feet are not touching the ground, it is 
called ‘typical hanging’. In this, constricting 
force is the full weight of the body. 


2. Atypical Hanging or Partial Hanging: 

When some part of the body touches the 
ground like knees, feet, etc., it is called 
‘atypical’ or ‘partial hanging’. 

Ligature 

Any type of ligature can be used for hanging, 
common being rope, dupatta, saree, dhoti, bed 
sheet, handkerchief, wires, etc. The ligature should 



4 A 


Fig. 9.1 See ligature and ligature mark on the neck 
in a case of death due to hanging. 


CFMT-09 (3rd Proof).p65 


54 


8/12/07, 9:34 AM 























Asphyxial Deaths 55 


be inspected for strength whether it can sustain the 
weight of the body or not. The ligature should be 
inspected microscopically for tissues present on it 
from the neck of the person who has hanged himself 
(Fig. 9.1). 

Symptoms of Hanging 

Initial symptoms are loss of power and sensation 
like flashes of light, noise in ears followed by 
unconsciousness. Injudicial hanging, convulsions 
may be seen. Since the onset of unconsciousness 
is very fast, hanging may be considered as a 
painless mode of death. Due to fast onset of 
unconsciousness, it may not be possible to save 
oneself in accidental or suicidal hanging. 

The heart continues to beat for 10-15 minutes 
after the respiration stops. 

Cause of Death 

The following are noted as causes of death due to 
hanging: 

1. Asphyxia: This is quite a common cause 
of death in hanging as ligature blocks the 
respiratory passage making air entry 
impossible. 

2. Venous Congestion: Since the venous 
supply of the brain is occluded due to 
constriction of jugular veins, there is 
congestion in the brain and it stops cerebral 
circulation due to anoxia. 

3. Combined Asphyxia and Venous Conges¬ 
tion: It is the commonest cause of death in 
hanging. 

4. Cerebral Ischemia: Due to the pressure of 
ligature on large arteries of the neck, the 
blood supply of the brain is affected 
resulting in cerebral ischemia. 

5. Fracture or Dislocation of Cervical 
Vertebrae: This usually occurs injudicial 
hanging due to sudden drop of about 
2 metres. As a result, spinal cord laceration 
may be seen causing instant death. Second 
and third vertebrae are commonly affected. 
Pharynx may be found injured in judicial 


hanging. Transverse tears on intima of 
carotid arteries may also be seen. 

The point of suspension in most of the cases 
may not be very high. It has been reported that 
people have committed suicide in sitting, kneeling 
or lying positions. Various studies have pointed that 
3-5 kg of tension can occlude jugular veins and 
carotid arteries, while about 16-30 kg of tension is 
required to obstruct vertebral arteries. Trachea is 
obstructed by a tension of about 15 kg. 

The death is instant in judicial hanging, while in 
ordinary hanging 3-5 minutes are sufficient to cause 
stoppage of respiration although heart may continue to 
beat up to 10-15 minutes. If air passages are not blocked 
completely, death may occur in 10-15 minutes. 

Management of Hanging Case 

The first step in management of hanging cases is 
to remove ligature immediately, preferably by 
cutting or removing it. Artificial respiration should 
be given immediately and the person should be 
shifted to hospital at the earliest where he should 
be given artificial oxygen and managed 
conservatively. The person who survives may have 
hemiplegia, convulsion, loss of memory, or some 
brain damage. 

Post-mortem Changes 

The following features should be noticed during 
post-mortem examination: 

1. External Examination: The ligature may 
be seen in the neck. It should be removed 
carefully by cutting, preserving the knot and 
both cut ends should be tied with a thread. 
It should be inspected and its dimensions 
should be noted. It should be sealed and then 
handed over to the police. 

The ligature mark is usually situated above the 
thyroid cartilage and is found to be going obliquely 
upwards following the line of mandible and may 
be interrupted due to presence of knot. In some 
cases, ligature mark may be present at thyroid 
cartilage level or below. 

The character of the mark varies according to 
the nature of the ligature used. The pattern of ligature 


CFMT-09 (3rd Proof).p65 


55 


8/12/07, 9:34 AM 


















56 Concise Textbook of Forensic Medicine and Toxicology 


Table 9.1 Differences between ante-mortem and post-mortem hanging 



Features 

Ante-mortem hanging 

Post-mortem hanging 

l. 

Motive 

Usually suicidal. Homicidal 
only in cases of lynching. 

Motive to disguise as suicide. 

2. 

Ligature mark 

Ligature mark well developed, 
base is parchment-like and is 
yellow or brown. 

No such features seen. 

3. 

Saliva 

Dribbling of saliva may be seen. 

Absent. 

4. 

Injuries 

No other injuries may be seen. 

Other injuries which caused death may be 
seen. 

5. 

Asphyxial features 

Will be seen in the body. 

No asphyxia signs present. 

6. 

Circumstantial evidence 

Closed room. No signs 
of struggle may be seen. 

Signs of struggle may be seen. 

7. 

Drag marks on the body 

Not present. 

May be seen. 

8. 

Suicide note 

May or may not be present. 

Never present. 

9. 

Rope fibres 

Maybe seen in the hands. 

Not seen. 


may be present on the neck skin. The ligature mark 
is like a groove, its base is pale, hard, leathery and 
parchment-like. The ligature mark is the deepest at 
the knot. The colour of the ligature mark is reddish 
brown if the body has been suspended for a long 
time. Sometimes in a fat person, a pseudo mark 
may be seen due to presence of skin folds of the 
neck. In these cases no characteristic marks like 
parchmentisation would be seen. 

The neck is found elongated and stretched. 
Petechial haemorrhages may be seen on face, neck 
and under the conjunctiva. The tongue may be seen 
protruded in some cases. Dribbling of saliva may 
be seen from the angle of mandible. This is 
considered as the surest sign of ante-mortem 
hanging as this is a vital phenomenon and cannot 
be produced after death, although in a dark skinned 
person, this sign may be difficult to detect. 

Turgescence may be observed in genital 
organs. Semen may be found at the urethral 
opening. Due to relaxation of sphincters, urine and 
faeces may be seen in clothes. If the body has been 
suspended for a long time, post-mortem staining may 
be seen in the arms and legs (lower part; Table 9.1). 

2. Internal Examination: A curved incision 
from behind the right mastoid process to the 
left, extending down up to sternum is useful 
for careful dissection of neck layer-by-layer 


for the best results. A dry, white and 
glistening subcutaneous tissue is seen 
underneath the ligature mark. This is typical 
in death from hanging. The carotid arteries 
may be found lacerated. The muscles of 
neck may be found ruptured especially in 
cases where great force has been used in 
hanging. The fracture of cervical vertebrae 
along with rupture of spinal cord may be 
seen in judicial hanging. Usually, thyroid 
and cricoid cartilages escape fracture. They 
may be found fractured if somehow ligature 
passes on the neck—may be in atypical 
hanging. Fracture of hyoid bone may be 
seen in some cases. The epiglottis and 
mucous membrane of mouth may be ruptured. 

The lungs may be congested, oedematous and 
exude blood mixed serum. The right side of the 
heart is filled with dark fluid and, due to 
haemorrhages the left side is empty. The abdominal 
organs are congested. The brain may show 
congestion. Petechial haemorrhages may be seen 
in lungs, heart and abdominal organs. 

Medico-legal Importance 

The questions normally asked of a doctor in a 
hanging case are: 


CFMT-09 (3rd Proof).p65 


56 


8/12/07, 9:34 AM 





















Asphyxial Deaths 57 


1. Whether a person has died of hanging or 
not? 

2. Whether hanging is accidental, suicidal, or 
homicidal? Sometimes, a person may be 
killed by other methods like strangulation, 
fire-arm or stabbing. This body may be put 
in hanging position so as to create an 
impression that the person had hanged 
himself. In such cases doctor should 
carefully examine the dead body and look 
for other causes of death. Careful dissection 
of neck would reveal that the person had 
died of hanging or strangulation. 

Hanging is mostly suicidal in nature. No age 
bar is there for suicide. Males commit more suicide 
as compared to females. Major reasons for 
committing suicide in males are unemployment, 
family tensions, drinking, etc. The major reasons 
for females committing suicide are family 
maladjustment, failure in exams, failure in love life, 
dowry, etc. 

Homicidal hanging is very rare. It is possible 
that one person is overpowered by a group of 
persons and forcibly hanged. In such cases, injuries 
may be seen on the victim who tries to defend 
himself. Lynching is a form of homicidal hanging 
which was quite prevalent in old times where a mob 
used to hang a condemned person by a tree. 

Accidental hanging is common among children 
who may accidentally die because of slippage of 
stripes of school bag on the neck. 

Auto-erotic hanging or sexual asphyxia is a 

form of accidental hanging. It has been reported 
that by producing asphyxia with a ligature on neck, 
sexual stimulation is enhanced in a sexually charged 
atmosphere. The victims are mostly males. Some 
soft material like handkerchief or wire may be used 
by the victim and its pressure is increased by hands 
or remotely by legs. The victim is usually found 
naked with pornographic material around him. If 
he has taken alcohol, asphyxia is rapidly produced. 
Sometimes, he may not be able to remove pressure 


in time and may die. In all such cases, examination 
of scene of crime is very useful. 

Strangulation 

Strangulation is a violent form of death which occurs 
from constriction of the neck by means of ligature 
or by other means without suspending the body: 

1. Throttling: It is defined when constriction 
of neck is produced by fingers or palms. 

2. Mugging: When constriction of neck is 
done by a foot, knee, or bend of elbow it is 
called mugging. 

3 . Bans-dola: It was practised earlier in North 
India where one strong bamboo is put in 
front of neck and one on the back. These 
are tied by rope. The constriction is caused 
by squeezing. Sometimes, squeezing is done 
by foot pressure on bamboos. 

4. Garroting: It was earlier used by thugs 
while committing robberies. In this a rope 
or handkerchief is suddenly thrown from 
behind around victim’s neck and pressure 
is suddenly applied. Since unconsciousness 
develops suddenly, the victim is unable to 
fight back and dies silently. 

In strangulation, if the air passages are 
occluded completely by ligature, the person is 
unable to shout and becomes unconscious 
immediately. If closure is partial, face may be seen 
cyanosed, hands may be clenched and convulsions 
may be seen. The cause of death in strangulation is 
asphyxia due to anoxic anoxia. 

Post-mortem Findings 

These are as follows: 

1. External Findings: Ligature may be seen 
on the neck. It should be photographed in 
situ. After removal, it should be preserved 
and handed over. The ligature mark in most 
of the strangulation cases is usually found 
below the thyroid cartilage encircling the entire 
neck, horizontally placed. Multiple ligatures 


CFMT-09 (3rd Proof).p65 


57 


8/12/07, 9:34 AM 


















58 Concise Textbook of Forensic Medicine and Toxicology 


may also be seen. The ligature mark may 
look like a groove, the base may be pale 
with reddish margin. The pattern of ligature 
may be seen. Abrasions and contusions may 
be seen around the ligature mark. In cases 
of throttling, the marks of thumb and fingers 
may be seen around trachea. These small 
bruises are disc-shaped, 1-2 cm in diameter 
and red initially and may look brown later. 
Sometimes, clustering of these bruises may 
be seen. Small linear or crescentic marks 
may be seen on the neck due to pressure of 
finger nails, which are quite characteristic 
of throttling. Struggle marks may also be 
present on the body such as abrasion or 
bruises on face, nose, mouth, back of the 
body, etc. There may be other injuries on 
the body like fracture, stab, etc. The face 
may be puffy and cyanosed. The eyes are 
usually prominent. The conjunctivae are 
severely congested. The petechial 
haemorrhages may be seen on the face. The 
lips may be blue. 

Bloody discharge may be seen from 
mouth and nostrils. The tongue may be 
swollen, bitten or bruised. The genital 
organs are congested. There may be 
discharge of urine, faeces or seminal fluid. 

2. Internal Findings: The dissection of the 
neck should be done in bloodless field as 
blood discharged from neck vessels may 
give erroneous results. To achieve this, the 
dissection of neck should be done after 
removal of brain, lungs and heart so that 
blood may be drained from neck vessels. 
The dissection of the neck should be done 
layer-by-layer as in case of hanging. 
Extravasation of blood into the 
subcutaneous tissues under the ligature mark 
is seen. Underlying neck muscles are 
usually lacerated. Laceration of sheath of 
carotid arteries may be seen. The fracture 
of the cornua of hyoid bone is commonly 
seen. Fracture of thyroid and cricoid 


cartilages is common. Although rarely, 
fracture of cervical vertebrae may also be 
seen. The trachea and larynx are congested 
and frothy mucus may be seen. The rings 
of trachea may also be fractured. The lungs 
may be oedematous showing dark fluid on 
section. Emphysematous bullae may be seen 
on the surface. The right side of the heart is 
full and the left empty. The abdominal 
organs are congested. The brain is also 
congested and may show petechial 
haemorrhages. 

Medico-legal Importance 

The doctor is often asked to opine: 

1. Whether cause of death is strangulation or 
not (Table 9.2). 

2. Whether the strangulation is suicidal, 
homicidal or accidental. 

A complete post-mortem examination is 
essential to certify that death has been caused by 
strangulation. Natural folds in the neck may 
sometimes create confusion. Suicidal strangulation 
is very rare, although it is reported in lunatics. It is 
not possible for an individual to strangulate himself 
as once unconsciousness supervenes, the ligature 
pressure decreases. 

Homicidal strangulation is the commonest. 
Accidental strangulation may occur in factories 
where accidentally a worker may be caught in 
moving belts. The children may also be strangled 
accidentally while playing. 

Suffocation 

Suffocation is a form of death which results from 
the exclusion of air from the lungs by means other 
than compression of neck. 

Causes 

The following are causes of suffocation: 

1. Smothering: It is defined as closure 
of mouth and nostrils. It is quite a common 
way to kill children as they offer less 


CFMT-09 (3rd Proof).p65 


58 


8/12/07, 9:34 AM 


















Asphyxial Deaths 59 


Table 9.2 Differences between hanging and strangulation 


Hanging Strangulation 


1. Face pale looking, petechial haemorrhages 
less common. 

2. Saliva dribbling down the chin seen. 

3. Neck elongated. 

4. External signs of asphyxia not prominent. 

5. Bleeding from nose, mouth and ears very rare. 

6. Ligature mark obliquely placed, dry, parchment 
like, going upward, highly placed in neck. 

7. Abrasion and contusion around edges of 
ligature mark absent. 

8. Subcutaneous tissues under ligature are white, 
hard and dry. 

9. Injury to muscles around ligature mark rare. 

10. Rupture of carotid arteries very rare. 

11. Fracture of larynx and trachea rare. 

12. Fracture dislocation of cervical vertebrae 
only seen in judicial hanging. 

13. Injuries on other parts usually absent. 

14. Sexual assault not seen. 

15. Emphysematous bullae seen on lung surface. 

16. Usually suicidal. 


Face congested, livid, petechial haemorrhages 
common. 

No such dribbling. 

No. 

Very prominent. 

Quite common. 

Ligature mark horizontal, round the neck, low 
in neck, base of groove soft and reddish. 

Quite common. 

Subcutaneous tissues under ligature are 
suffused with blood. 

Quite common. 

Common. 

Common. Hyoid bone also fractured 
commonly. 

Fracture—dislocation of cervical vertebral rare 
but can be seen. 

Injury on other parts due to struggle may be 
seen. 

Evidence of sexual assault may be seen 
sometimes. 

May be present. 

Mostly homicidal. 


resistance. A small pillow may be used to 
apply forcibly to mouth and nostrils. Even 
old persons and women are killed as their 
physical strength is quite less than able- 
bodied men. Accidentally, small children 
can be smothered if they are overlaid by 
their mothers or they are hard pressed 
against breasts while feeding. 

2. Choking: It is defined as obstruction of air 
passages from within. It is mostly accidental 
due to impact of foreign bodies like fish 
bone, coin, button, roundworms, artificial 
teeth, etc. The foreign body induces 
laryngeal spasm, as a result of which the air 
passages are completely blocked. Even a 
small foreign body may induce laryngeal 
spasm killing the person. Certain diseases 
can also choke a person. Tumours may press 
on air passages. Vomitus may enter air 
passages and produce laryngeal spasm. 


3. Traumatic Asphyxia: When there is 
mechanical fixation of chest sufficient to 
cause death, it is called ‘traumatic asphyxia’. 
It may occur in big crowds like in a fair 
where people may be trampled. Pressure on 
chest may occur in causing death suddenly 
in labourers. It may also occur in road traffic 
accidents, railway accidents, etc. 

4. Inhalation of Irrespirable Gases: 
Inhalation of irrespirable gases like carbon 
dioxide, smoke in building fire, hydrogen 
sulphide, methane in sewer workers may 
cause suffocation. Suffocation may also 
occur if a lot of persons are confined in a 
small place. 

5. Cafe Coronary: It has been reported in 
many cases that a person sitting in cafe or 
bar may suddenly collapse and die. It looks 
like he had a massive heart attack. But on 
post-mortem examination, a small bolus of 


CFMT-09 (3rd Proof).p65 


59 


8/12/07, 9:34 AM 





















60 Concise Textbook of Forensic Medicine and Toxicology 


food or fish bone may be present in 
respiratory passages indicating that a person 
has died of asphyxia rather than coronary 
heart disease. The persons who are drunk 
are more liable to develop cafe coronary, as 
cough reflex is less due to alcohol. The cause 
of death in all suffocation cases is asphyxia. 
Death occurs in about 5-6 minutes. 

Post-mortem Findings 

These involve external and internal examination: 

1. External: In homicidal smothering, effects 
produced by forcible closure of mouth and 
nostrils may be seen in forms of abrasions 
or contusions around mouth and nostrils. 
Laceration of lip, broken tooth may be seen. 
The fracture of nose septum may be seen, 
along with flattening. Due to struggle, 
abrasions or contusions may be seen on 
cheeks, lower jaw, chest, etc. In traumatic 
asphyxia, fractures of ribs may be seen. The 
face may be suffused. The eyeballs are 
prominent and conjunctivae congested. 
Petechial haemorrhages may be seen. The 
tongue may be protruded. 

2. Internal: The foreign body like cloth, mud, 
coin, etc. may be found in mouth, throat or 
trachea. The air passages are congested. The 
lungs are congested and oedematous. Soot 
particles may be seen up to bronchioles, if 
a person has died of suffocation in a building 
fire. The Tardieu’s spots may be present on 
lungs, heart, or other visceral organs. The 
right side of the heart is full while the left 
empty. The brain is congested. The 
abdominal organs are congested. 

Medico-legal Importance 

The doctor is called upon to depose: 

1. Whether cause of death is suffocation or not. 

2. Whether suffocation is accidental, suicidal 
or homicidal. 

Presence of foreign body or circumstantial 

evidence point to suffocation in most of the cases. 


The detailed post-mortem examination is essential 
to establish whether suffocation is the cause of 
death or not. Suicidal suffocation is very rare but 
reported in lunatics. Accidental suffocation may 
occur in children when they swallow a small foreign 
body like a coin while playing. Accidental 
suffocation may occur if a person is trapped in a 
building fire or falls in sewer. The firemen or sewer 
workers may die while doing their duty due to 
suffocation. Homicidal suffocation is quite 
common. The foreign body like cloth may be 
inserted forcibly in mouth. The pillow is commonly 
used to kill children, old people or women. 

The methods adopted are: 

(a) Burking: Burking is a method adopted by 
Burke and Hare to kill their victims. They 
used to throw their victim down on the 
ground and kneeling on chest used to close 
mouth and nostrils with one hand, and 
firmly holding both jaws together to block 
air passages. They used to kill persons to 
supply dead bodies to medical colleges for 
dissection. 

(b) Bans-dola: In this, the victim’s chest is 
compressed between two wooden planks by 
the assailants. Fracture of ribs and even 
laceration of lungs may be seen. 

Drowning 

It is defined as a form of death which occurs when 
atmospheric air is prevented from entering lungs 
due to submersion of body in water or other fluids. 
To die from drowning, it is not essential that there 
should be a complete submersion. Even if only face 
is submerged, death can occur. 

Types of Drowning 

The various types of drowning are as follows: 

1. Wet Drowning: It may be in fresh water or 
sea water. The post-mortem findings are 
different in both cases. 

2. Dry Drowning: Sometimes, as water enters 
the air passages, it induces laryngeal spasm 


CFMT-09 (3rd Proof).p65 


60 


8/12/07, 9:34 AM 


















Asphyxial Deaths 61 


which leads to complete closure of air entry 
into lungs. As a result of this, water does 
not reach lungs. The characteristic features 
of drowning are absent. 

3. Secondary Drowning: It is when death 
occurs after sometimes when a person is 
rescued from being drowned. Death may 
occur due to aspiration, pneumonia or 
electrolyte imbalance. 

4. Immersion Syndrome (Cold water 
drowning): Sometimes when a person is 
dropped into cold water, skin receptors are 
activated immediately. Consequently, 
sudden dyspnoea and sometimes vagal 
inhibition occurs. As a result of which heart 
stops immediately. 

The person dies suddenly and classical picture 
of drowning does not appear. However, in some 
cases, sudden ventricular fibrillation has also been 
reported. 

Mechanism of Drowning 

When a person jumps into water or is thrown into 
it, he sinks to the depth in proportion to the 
momentum of his fall, but as a result of buoyancy 
and struggling movements, he comes to the surface. 
If he is not a swimmer, he cries for help and 
struggles to keep mouth above water level. But 
since the body is heavy, he starts going downwards. 
During this process, water enters into his respiratory 
passage and induces coughing. The water enters 
the lungs and replaces air. As a result, the body 
becomes heavier and goes down further. Due to 
movements of hands and feet, he may rise further 
and take more water into lungs. This alternate rising 
and sinking continues till he becomes unconscious, 
or all the air in the lungs is replaced by water. Due 
to unconsciousness that has set in and weight of 
the body, he sinks deep to die. 

In fresh water drowning, water being hypotonic 
is absorbed into the lungs immediately and enters 
pulmonary circulation. As a result there is 
haemodilution, increase in blood volume and the 
concentration of sodium/potassium falls. There is 


haemolysis of red blood cells. As a result of which 
potassium concentration goes up in blood and 
sodium concentration relatively falls due to 
haemodilution. Increased potassium causes 
ventricular fibrillation leading to fall in blood 
pressure. 

In salt water which is hypertonic, when the 
water enters into the alveolar spaces, it draws more 
fluid leading to pulmonary oedema. It causes 
haemoconcentration and hypovolaemia. There is 
no haemolysis and no ventricular fibrillation. Death 
occurs in more time (8-9 minutes) as compared to 
fresh water (5-6 minutes). 

Symptoms of Drowning 

When a person dies of drowning he encounters 
same types of feelings as that of hanging. There 
may be hallucinations and recall imagery before 
onset of unconsciousness. 

Cause of Death 

In drowning, death occurs due to following reasons: 

1. Asphyxia: It is the commonest cause of 
death in majority of the cases. 

2. Vagal Inhibition: It may be seen in some 
cases in cold water drowning. 

3 . Concussion: It may occur if a person’s head 
strikes against some hard object inside water. 
If a person falls flat, even the impact of water 
may be there on chest to cause concussion. 

4. Syncope: It may occur in epileptics 
suddenly falling into water. 

5. Cerebral Haemorrhage: It may occur in a 
hypertensive person or whose cerebral 
vessels are diseased. 

6. Exhaustion: The person may die from 
exhaustion in order to keep himself above 
the water. 

7. Injuries: The person may die because of 
injuries sustained while in water, like head 
injury if struck against hard surface. Fracture, 
dislocation of cervical vertebrae may be there 
if a person falls into water from a height. 


CFMT-09 (3rd Proof).p65 


61 


8/12/07, 9:34 AM 


















62 Concise Textbook of Forensic Medicine and Toxicology 


Fatal Period 

Asphyxia starts within 2 minutes of submersion. 
Death occurs in about 5 minutes although heart may 
continue to beat for 10 minutes. If the water is cold, 
death occurs early. 

Post-mortem Findings 

The external and internal post-mortem findings are 
as follows: 

1. External: The clothes may be wet if 
examined early. The face is usually pale, 
eyes are open or closed, the conjunctivae 
are congested and pupils are dilated. 

The tongue may be swollen and 
protruded. A fine, white, lathery tenacious 
froth is seen at the mouth and nostrils. It 
increases on compression of chest. It is 
regarded as a diagnostic sign of drowning. 
Sometimes, grass or weeds or leaves may 
be seen clasped in the hands of deceased 
due to cadaveric spasm. 

The special external findings sometimes 
observed in cases of drowning are as 
follows: 

(a) Cutis anserina (Goose skin): The 

granular and puckered appearance of 
skin may be seen on front surface of 
body especially on limbs in winter 
season due to contraction of the 
involuntary muscle (erector pilae) of the 
skin. The contraction elevates the hair 
follicle and makes hair stand. This 
phenomenon is not diagnostic of ante¬ 
mortem drowning. It may be seen in 
nervous shock, violent accidental deaths 
or may develop after death as a result of 
rigor mortis of erector pilorum muscles. 

(b) Washerwoman’s hand: The skin of 
hands and feet may show a bleached, 
corrugated and sodden appearance due 
to prolonged stay of the body in water 
(10-12 hours). It is called washer 


women’s hand. It only shows that the body 
has been in water for considerable time. It 
has no relation with the cause of death. 

The rigor mortis appears early in 
cases of drowning. The penis and 
scrotum may be retracted and contracted 
if water has been cold. 

2. Internal: The chest findings are quite 
typical in drowning. The lungs are distended 
like balloons. They overlap heart and may 
protrude out of chest wall when it is opened. 
Lungs may be indented with rib marks. They 
are heavy, doughy to feel, grossly 
oedematous and may pit on finger pressure. 
Large patches of haemorrhages commonly 
called Paltauf’s haemorrhages may be 
seen subpleurally. They occur due to 
increased pressure causing rupture of 
alveolar walls. Usually, they are present on 
anterior surface and margins of lungs. 
Petechial haemorrhages, which are small 
may be seen on lungs, but they are quite 
uncommon in drowning. On section, frothy 
fluid mixed with blood may exude from the 
cut section. Fine froth may be seen in 
trachea and bronchial passages. The left side 
of the heart is usually empty and the right 
side full. The brain is congested. A large 
quantity of water along with small weeds 
may be seen in stomach and small intestine. 
This is a very important sign as it can only 
be produced in ante-mortem drowning 
(Table 9.3). The internal organs are 
congested. 

Gettler’s Test: This is a laboratory test done 
where difference in concentration of 
chlorides, magnesium (sea water drowning), 
specific gravity of blood of two chambers 
of heart is compared to diagnose drowning. 
In fresh water drowning, the concentration 
of chlorides in blood of right side of heart 
would be less as compared to left, while in 
sea water drowning, the concentration of mag¬ 
nesium would be more in right side of heart. 


CFMT-09 (3rd Proof).p65 


62 


8/12/07, 9:34 AM 


















Asphyxial Deaths 63 


Table 9.3 Differences between ante-mortem and post-mortem drowning 



Features 

Ante-mortem drowning 

Post-mortem drowning 

1 . 

Froth 

Fine, leathery froth present 
at mouth and nose. 

No froth seen. 

2. 

Lungs 

Bloated, overlap heart, 
indented with rib marks, 
doughy to feel, grossly 
oedematous. 

Water may be seen in lungs. 

3. 

Cadaveric spasm 

Weeds may be seen in hands. 

Not present. 

4. 

Injuries 

Usually not present. Flead 
injury or other injuries may 
be seen if person hit them. 

Injuries resulting in death from other 
reasons may be seen. 

5. 

Asphyxial findings 

Will be seen. 

Signs of death from other reasons may be 
seen like shock/coma etc. 

6. 

Motive 

Usually accidental or 
suicidal. Homicidal mostly 
in children or old people. 

Mostly homicidal. Death to be disguised 
as accidental or suicidal. 



Fig. 9.2 Various types of diatoms. 


DiatomTest: Diatoms are a class of unicellular 
algae varying in size from 2 micron to a 
millimetre, found in fresh water and sea water. 
There are about 15,000 types of diatoms. 

They are varying in shape. They have 
a siliceous, very hard covering and they can 
pass alveolar walls and hence can reach to 
any part of body via circulation. Finding of 
diatoms on microscopic examination from 
brain, lung, liver, bone marrow can suggest 
that the person has died of drowning. The 
types of diatoms recovered from the body 
can be matched with diatoms present in 
water for more logical conclusion of 
drowning. The diatoms are isolated by Add 
Digestion Technique. The concentrated 
sulphuric acid is used for digestion of tissue, 
after which it is centrifuged and examined 
for diatoms. The test site to examine diatoms 
is bone marrow from long bones like femur, 
humerus, tibia or sternum. Brain tissue and 
lung tissue are also good sites for looking 
for diatoms (Fig. 9.2). 

Medico-legal Importance 

The doctor is often asked: 


CFMT-09 (3rd Proof).p65 


63 


8/12/07, 9:34 AM 






























64 Concise Textbook of Forensic Medicine and Toxicology 


(a) Whether death is caused by drowning. 

(b) Whether the drowning is accidental, suicidal 
or homicidal. 

(c) Duration of the body in water. 

Whether death is caused by drowning: A 

careful post-mortem examination should 
rule out fowl play in most of the cases. The 
doctor should look for any injuries on the 
body which may show application of force 
on the body. The following points go in 
favour of death due to drowning: 

(i) The presence of profuse fine, lathery 
froth which increases on pressure on 
chest. 

(ii) Cadaveric spasm in hands holding some 
weeds. 

(iii) The typical chest picture of drowning 
seen in lungs when opened on dissection. 


(iv) The presence of water, mud, weeds in 
stomach and small intestine. 

Whether drowning is suicidal, accidental, 
or homicidal: Mostly, drowning is 
accidental but suicidal drowning is also very 
common. Females constitute a high number 
who commit suicide by jumping into village 
wells. 

Homicidal drowning is rare except in 
cases of infants or small children who can 
be thrown into water. 

Duration of body being in water: As the 

body is heavy, it starts sinking into the water 
and does not come out till putrefactive 
change starts and presence of a large amount 
of gas makes it float. In warm water, the 
putrefaction is faster so floatation is early 
reported as compared to cold water. 


CFMT-09 (3rd Proof).p65 


64 


8/12/07, 9:34 AM 


















CHAPTER 

Death from Starvation, Cold and 
Heat 


STARVATION 

It may be acute or chronic: 

1. Acute Starvation: It is defined as sudden 
deprivation of food from the body. In some 
cases, even water is withdrawn. This 
situation mostly happens in famine,or 
natural disasters like earthquake when a 
person is trapped in debris or in floods. 
Acute starvation also happens in political 
workers, who go on fast-unto-death to 
achieve political goals. It is also reported in 
religious fastings. 

2. Chronic Starvation: In India, chronic 
starvation is common in poor people who 
eat less due to unavailability of food. 
Children are most affected. 

Clinical Features of Acute Starvation 

The feeling of hunger remains for about 2 days and 
then is replaced by pain in epigastrium with intense 
thirst. The pain may be a bit relieved by pressure. 
After 4 or 5 days, the body fat starts decreasing 
and general emaciation sets in. The eyes appear 
sunken, buccal fat disappears, face looks dry, and 
breath turns foul. Slowly the voice becomes slow, 
pulse is weak, and body temperature becomes sub¬ 
normal. 

The abdomen is sunken. The limbs become 
thin. There is a generalised loss of muscle power. 


Initially, there is constipation but later diarrhoea 
may start. The urine becomes less and shows 
features of acidosis like ketone bodies. 

The consciousness and intellect remains clear 
till the end as brain tissue is least affected due to 
starvation. But in the end, the person may pass into 
coma and die. Delirium and convulsion may be seen 
before death. 

Clinical Features of Chronic Starvation 

It may have dry or wet type of picture. In dry one, 
gross emaciation is nearly all over the body. The 
person may be having diseases due to low 
immunity. In wet type, oedema may be seen all 
over the body. Pleural effusion may be seen. 
Usually, a person is found to be anaemic. The fatal 
period in chronic starvation is quite variable. If both 
food and water is withdrawn, death may occur in 
10 days. If only food is withdrawn, person may 
survive for some weeks as long fasting up to 6-8 
weeks have been reported by religious saints. The 
effect of chronic starvation on children is very 
severe. Old people can survive starvation for a 
longer time as their requirements are less. Females 
can withstand starvation better than males due to 
the presence of more fat in the body. 

Healthy people can bear starvation better than 
persons who are diseased. Active physical activity 
enhances death in starvation. Starvation in extreme 
temperatures also enhances death. 


CFMT-10 (3rd Proof).p65 


65 


8/12/07, 9:34 AM 



















66 Concise Textbook of Forensic Medicine and Toxicology 


The person who is suffering from starvation 
should be treated carefully. The food should not be 
rushed orally as intestines have gone weak. Initially, 
fresh juice may be given and later solid food may 
be introduced slowly. Intravenous drip of glucose 
should be started immediately and monitored well. 
The person should be kept in warm temperature 
and electrolyte imbalance should be corrected at 
the earliest. 

Post-mortem Findings 

These include external as well as internal features: 

1. External: The body appears grossly 
emaciated, skin is dry and shrivelled. Eye¬ 
balls are dry and sunken. The body may emit 
a bad smell. The muscles are soft and 
wasted. The fat is almost absent from 
various parts of the body like abdomen, 
breasts, hips, etc. 

2. Internal: The internal organs appear 
contracted. Fat in subcutaneous tissue may 
be absent. There may be ulcers in the 
stomach and small intestines due to stress 
of starvation on the body. The intestines are 
empty and contracted. The normal organs 
may be pale. The brain appears normal. 

Medico-legal Importance 

The acute starvation is usually accidental, like in 
natural calamities, e.g. in earthquake, building 
collapse where people may be trapped. 

Starvation may be rarely suicidal except in 
some persons who under the influence of insanity 
may starve to death. Willful starvation to achieve 
political or religious goals is quite common. In these 
situations, the medical officer is often confronted 
with a dilemma whether forceful feeding should 
be started on direction of civil authorities or not. 
Since in such cases, the person remains conscious 
till the end, it may be ethically wrong to feed 
someone forcefully against his/her wishes, and is 
also unlawful. But if the person becomes 
unconscious, feeding can be done to save his/her 


life. Feeding should be suggested to a person who 
is under willful starvation, when ketone bodies 
appear in urine. He should be explained the 
impending danger. Homicidal starvation can be 
seen in small children or old persons who can be 
starved to death by confining them in their houses. 

COLD 

Effects of Cold on Body 

When a person is exposed to cold it induces extreme 
vasoconstriction, a protective mechanism for 
maintaining correct body temperature. It conserves 
body heat by reducing blood supply to exposed 
areas. But if exposure to cold is high, it leads to ice 
crystal formation intra- or extracellularly, which 
causes immense damage to cells. Severe cold also 
causes injury to small blood vessels with formation 
of agglutinative thrombi in them. But if the person 
who is exposed to cold is suddenly exposed to heat, 
he will face overheating metabolically and he can 
suffer damage. 

Fatty tissues and myelinated nerve fibres face 
direct effect of exposure to cold. Vascular damage 
leading to ischaemia is also seen. 

Frostbites 

When the body is exposed to freezing temperature 
(-8°C to -10°C), erythematous patches appear on 
skin which are caused by impaired local circulation, 
injury and shock. The frostbites are both, superficial 
and deep. Superficial frost bites involving skin and 
subcutaneous tissues have soft blisters in 24-36 
hours. These blisters become black and hard in 2 
days. Deep frostbites are quite serious as they 
involve deep tissues up to bone. Blisters appear later 
in 3-7 days. There may be marked sloughing of 
tissues. Exposed parts of the body like nose, eyes, 
ears, fingers and toes are usually affected due to 
cold. If a person has been in cold water for a long 
time, it produces a phenomenon called ‘immersion 


CFMT-10 (3rd Proof).p65 


66 


8/12/07, 9:34 AM 


















Death from Starvation, Cold and Heat 67 


foot’ or ‘trench foot’. This may be seen in survivors 
of shipwreck. The frostbite phenomenon is a vital 
reaction and hence cannot be produced after death. 

In general, moderate cold is good for health. It 
recharges the body and improves metabolism. But 
if the body is not properly clothed and is exposed 
to severe cold, it causes stiffening of muscles. 
Hypothermia sets in and the person dies. The death 
occurs due to less supply of oxygen to tissues and 
brain tissue as haemoglobin is unable to part with 
oxygen due to low temperature. The using capacity 
of tissues is also reduced. The person may develop 
ventricular fibrillation. 

Treatment 

Immediately the person should be shifted away 
from the cold. His clothings should be removed 
and new warm clothes should be given. The person 
should be warmed by hot water bottles or warm 
water. Some soft rubbing with hands may be done. 
Direct heating of the person should not be done. 
Blisters should be handed properly. The person 
should be treated conservatively. 

Post-mortem Findings 

It includes external and internal features: 

1. External: Frostbites are characteristically 
seen as pale, irregularly margined, dusky red 
patches on exposed parts. Rigor mortis is 
delayed. The body may be quite cold. 

2. Internal: The internal findings are not 
specific. The organs are found to be 
congested. The blood may appear bright red 
owing to non-dissociation of oxygen from 
haemoglobin. Sometimes, ice crystals may 
be seen microscopically in capillaries. Stress 
ulcers may be seen in stomach and intestine. 

Medico-legal Importance 

The death due to cold is usually accidental. It may 
be seen in small children, old beggars and drunkards 


who may die when exposed to cold while sleeping 
on streets. Small infants can be exposed to cold if 
thrown over streets with an intention to kill them. 

HEAT 

Effects of Heat 

The heat on the body causes sweat and peripheral 
vasodilatation. The effects of heat on body are 
classified as following types: 

1. Heat Exhaustion: The sweating induced by 
heat causes dehydration and electrolyte loss. 
The person feels giddy, may have headache, 
malaise and may fall down. He may feel 
very thirsty, along with cramps in legs. He 
may have oliguria. He may collapse later. 
In some cases, the person may collapse 
suddenly without symptoms and die. 

2. Heat Syncope: In this, the person collapses 
as a result of hypotension induced by heat. 

3 . Heat Fatigue: The performance of a person 
may start decreasing due to exposure to heat. 
He may feel fatigued and less motivated for 
work. 

4. Heatstroke: It is also called ‘heat 
hyperpyrexia’ or ‘ sun stroke ’. It may be seen 
in workers who have been working in the 
sun in high temperature for a long time. In 
such cases, symptoms appear suddenly and 
the person may collapse suddenly. In such 
cases, sweating is absent and body may 
show higher temperature (hyperpyrexia). 
Pupils may be dilated and face may be 
flushed. In some persons, symptoms appear 
to start slowly. Initially there may be profuse 
sweating, extreme thirst, confusion, 
headache, hypotension and pupils may be 
dilated. Slowly, sweating stops and 
temperature of body starts rising and the 
person becomes unconscious. 


CFMT-10 (3rd Proof).p65 


67 


8/12/07, 9:34 AM 


















68 Concise Textbook of Forensic Medicine and Toxicology 


5. Heat Cramps: In workers who are working 
in the sun or heated atmosphere, cramps 
start occurring in legs as a result of sweating 
causing loss of electrolytes, especially 
sodium. Cramps may occur in hand or 
fingers. 

Treatment 

The person should be immediately removed from 
the heat. He may be given water to drink. 
Electrolyte balance should be corrected by giving 
salted water. In order to cool the body, 
hydrotherapy should be started immediately. Fluids 


should be started intravenously to correct fluid 
imbalance. 

Post-mortem Findings 

Rigor mortis starts early and passes off early. 
Sweating may be absent. The body is dry and may 
show higher temperature initially. Petechial 
haemorrhages may be seen. Internal organs are 
found to be congested. 

Medico-legal Importance 

Most deaths occurring due to heat are accidental, 
as in construction workers or industrial workers. 


CFMT-10 (3rd Proof).p65 


68 


8/12/07, 9:34 AM 


















CHAPTER 

Injuries from Burns, Scalds, 
Lightning and Electricity 


BURNS 

Definitions 

Burns are defined as injury caused to the body by 
the application of dry heat like flame, heated 
material or radiant heat. 

Scalds are wet heat injuries produced by 
application of heated liquid or its gaseous form like 
steam. Scalds are usually not so severe as the liquid 
or gas runs off from the surface (Table 11.1). 

Medico-legally speaking, injuries caused by 
friction, electricity, lightning, corrosive substances 
and radiation are classified as burns. 

Classification 

There are various classifications of burns. 
Clinically, burns are classified as superficial and 
deep burns. Superficial burns involve only 
epidermis whereas deep burns extend beyond 
epidermis into dermis, tissues and bone. The 
following are other commonly used classifications 
of burns: 

1. Dupuytren’s Classification: It classifies 
burns into following six categories: 

(a) First degree: It is simple erythema or 
redness produced on application of heat. 
Only superficial inflammation is seen. 
It is painful but disappears in 2 or 3 days. 
It involves epidermis superficially. 


(b) Second degree: In this blisters are 
formed and redness produced on 
application of heat. The epidermis is 
totally affected. It is very painful. They 
usually heal in 6-7 days. 

(c) Third degree: In third degree burns, the 
epidermis is totally destroyed and the 
dermis is involved. These are quite 
painful as nerve endings are totally 
exposed. 

(d) Fourth degree: In fourth degree burns, 
the whole skin is destroyed. The burns 
are not painful as nerve endings are 
destroyed. The skin comes out like 
sloughs after some days. 

(e) Fifth degree: In fifth degree burns, the 
dermis is destroyed totally. Muscles are 
also affected. These kinds of burns cause 
nerve deformity. 

(f) Sixth degree: In this type of burn, 
charring of the whole limb may be seen. 
Bones are also charred up. 

2. Heba’s Classification: It classifies burns 

into three category only: 

(a) Epidermal burn: First degree and 
second degree mentioned above are 
grouped as epidermal burns. 

(b) Dermo-epidermal burn: It involves 
third and fourth degree as mentioned 
above. 


CFMT-11 (3rd Proof).p65 


69 


8/12/07, 9:35 AM 



















70 Concise Textbook of Forensic Medicine and Toxicology 


Table 11.1 Differences between scalds and burns 


Features 

Scalds 

Burns 

l. 

Cause 

Hot fluids 

Dry heat 

2. 

Skin 

Sodden and bleached 

Dry and shrivelled 

3. 

Vesicles 

Present over whole scalded area 

Present over burnt area 

4. 

Singeing of hair 

Absent 

Present 

5. 

Charring 

Absent 

Present 

6. 

Soot particles in upper 
respiratory passages 

Absent 

May be seen 

7. 

Scar 

Small scar may be formed 

Thick scar seen 


(c) Deep bums: Fifth and sixth degree bums 
are called ‘deep burns’. 

Effects of burns 

The following conditions affect the nature 

of burns: 

1 . Intensity of heat: If the intensity of heat 
applied is high, more burn results. 

2. Duration: If exposure is for greater 
duration, the burns would be more 
severe. 

3. Extent of area involved: To estimate 
the body area of burns, the ‘rule of nine’ 
is applied, which is given in Table 11.2. 
About 60-80 per cent of superficial 
burns are fatal while about 40 per cent 
of deep burns can be fatal, although 


Table 11.2 ‘Rule of nine' to estimate percentage of body 
area involved in burns 


Area 

Percentage 

1. Head and neck 

9 

2. Right upper limb 

9 

3. Left upper limb 

9 

4. Right lower limb 

18 

5. Left lower limb 

18 

6. Anterior trunk 

18 

7. Posterior trunk 

18 

8. Genitalia 

1 

Total 

100 


cases have been reported where persons 
have survived even after 80-90 per cent 
of superficial or 70 per cent deep burns. 

4. Site: Burns on trunk especially over 
abdomen are quite severe as compared 
to limbs. Burns of genital area carry high 
fatality. 

5. Age: Children are very often involved 
in burn but can stand them better. Old 
people are more prone to death as 
compared to adults. 

6. Sex: Men tolerate burns better than 
Women. 

Causes of Death Due to Burns 

The causes of death in cases of burns are classified 

into: 

1. Immediate causes 

2. Late causes. 

Immediate Causes 

1. Shock: Severe pain and sudden loss of fluid 
causes hypovolaemic shock leading to 
death. Usually death occurs within 24 hours. 
Over 50 per cent of fluid loss is fatal if not 
corrected immediately. If the bums are about 
100 per cent, death may occur within 4-6 
hours. Sometimes, death may be reported 
due to fright or severe pain leading to 
vasovagal shock (Fig. 11.1). 


CFMT-11 (3rd Proof).p65 


70 


8/12/07, 9:35 AM 
























Injuries from Burns, Scalds, Lightning and Electricity 71 



Fig. 11.1 Body showing 100 per cent burns. 


2. Suffocation: If the person is caught in 
smoke and fire; as in a house fire or had 
tried to commit suicide by pouring kerosene 
oil over himself, smoke may enter the air 
passages leading to asphyxia along with 
burns. In some cases, person dies mainly 
because of suffocation and shock. 

3 . Injuries: While in process of sustaining burns, 
the person may sustain some injuries, like 
hitting an object or injuries from falling walls 
in cases of a person caught in home fire. 

Late Causes of Death 

Septicaemia supervenes in 36 hours and signs of 
infection can be seen in 48 hours. Most of the deaths 


occurring after 48 hours are due to infection causing 
meningitis, peritonitis, pneumonia and other 
complications. 

Fatal Period 

Most deaths occurs in severe bums within 24 hours, 
but deaths in first week are also common. In cases 
where infection sets in, death may occur even after 
weeks. 

Are Burns Simple or Grievous in Nature? 

Burns of first and second degree are simple injury 
if they are not extensive. Deep burns are grievous 
as they produce permanent scars. If the person goes 
into shock after burns, they may be classified as 
grievous. If burns cause deformity or impairment 
of movement of joint, they may be classified as 
grievous. Even extensive first and second degree 
burns can be classified as grievous if it endangers 
life or puts the person in severe body pain or if he 
is unable to carry out daily pursuits of life for more 
than 20 days. 

Post-mortem Findings 

These include external and internal features: 

1. External: The body which has burns should 
be carefully examined. Clothes should be 
inspected as they may be found stuck to the 
body if they are of synthetic nature. The 
smell of inflammable substances like 
kerosene, petrol may be there initially. 
Pugilistic attitude: When the body is 
exposed to a very high temperature it causes 
stiffening of muscles. It is due to coagulation 
of proteins. Limbs get flexed and fingers 
hooked like claws. The body assumes an 
attitude of defence and this fencing posture 
is called pugilistic attitude. The area 
involving burns should be carefully noted. 
Heat rupture of the skin may be seen. 


CFMT-11 (3rd Proof).p65 


71 


8/12/07, 9:35 AM 



















72 Concise Textbook of Forensic Medicine and Toxicology 


2. Internal: Due to heat, skull bones may be 
fractured and skull may open up. These are 
characteristics curved fractures in the skull; 
such fractures are also reported in long 
bones. 

Heat Haematoma 


Medico-legal Significance 

The burns are of great medico-legal significance. 
The first and foremost question to be put to a doctor 
is to ascertain whether burns are ante-mortem or 
post-mortem. 

Ante-mortem Bums vs Post-mortem Burns 


Sometimes, a thin layer of extradural blood may 
be seen underneath skull which looks like a 
sponging mass. It is called ‘heat haematoma’. Its 
appearance is that of a honeycomb which makes it 
different from traumatic haematoma. It is due to 
intense heat. 

The brain along with meninges is congested 
in case of death due to burns. Soot particles may 
be seen in upper and lower respiratory passages. 
Lungs may be congested and oedematous in cases 
where death has occurred due to the accompanying 
suffocation. The blood may appear cherry red due 
to carboxyhaemoglobin. 

Sometimes ulceration may be seen in small 
intestine due to burns which are called ‘Curling’s 
ulcer’. The abdominal organs may be found to be 
congested. 


The following are the main points to ascertain 
whether burns are ante-mortem or not (Table 11.3): 

1. Line of Redness: It is a vital line due to 
tissue reaction between burnt part and 
unburned part. It is a permanent line which 
persists even after death. Some amount of 
erythema due to distention of capillaries 
may be seen beyond the line of redness 
which may disappear after some time. This 
line of redness cannot be produced in cases 
of burns after death. 

2. Vesication: Blisters caused by ante-mortem 
bums are bigger in size. They have red and 
inflamed base, contain a lot of serous fluid 
containing albumin, chlorides and white 
blood cells; whereas blisters caused by burns 


Table 11.3 Differences between ante-mortem and post-mortem burns 



Features 

Ante-mortem burns 

Post-mortem burns 

1. 

Line of redness 

Present around burnt area 

Absent 

2. 

Vesication 

Blisters contain serous fluids 

Blisters contain fluid and air 



with proteins and chlorides 

Proteins and chlorides are not seen 



The underlying base is red 

Base is dry and hard 

3. 

Reparative process 

Present 

Absent 

4. 

Blood 

May be cherry red due to carbon 
monoxide 

Not seen 

5. 

Soot particles in upper 
respiratory passages 

Present 

Absent 

6. 

Curling’s ulcer 

May be seen 

Absent 

7. 

Enzyme activity 

Present as follows: 

Immediate - Tissue cathepsin 

10 minutes - Serotonin 

20 minutes - Histamine 

1 hour - Esterases and ATPases 

3 hours - Acid phosphatases 

4 hours - Alkaline phosphatases 

Absent 


CFMT-11 (3rd Proof).p65 


72 


8/12/07, 9:35 AM 





















Injuries from Burns, Scalds, Lightning and Electricity 73 


after death have hard, dry and homy base. 
These blisters mostly have air and very less 
quantity of fluid. They may have a trace of 
albumin and chloride, while there is no white 
cell. 

3. Reparative Process: Signs of recovery like 
formation of granulation tissue, slough and 
pus formation indicate that the burns were 
caused during life. Various enzyme studies 
can also be done which may show enzyme 
changes, which are absent in post-mortem 
burns. 

The following time-related changes in burns 
are appreciated: 

1. Redness occur immediately after heat 
application. 

2. Blisters form within 1 hour. 

3. The crust formation due to dryness of the 
skin involved starts in 12-24 hours and is 
completed in 72 hours. 

4. Pus formation starts after 36 hours; may be 
seen in 3 or 4 days. 

5. Blisters open up, superficial sloughs may 
separate out in 5 or 6 days. The deep slough 
takes longer, i.e. about 15 days. 

6. Deformity or complete recovery may be 
seen in weeks. 

Deciding Whether Bums are Suicidal, Homicidal 
or Accidental 

Accidental burns are quite common in women and 
children. Women may sustain burns while working 
in kitchen. Children may unknowingly touch hot 
liquids or solids. 

Suicidal burns are rare in men but common in 
women. Due to the prevalent dowry tradition, there 
may be harassment of brides in their in laws’ house. 
Many cases have been reported where brides have 
committed suicide by pouring kerosene oil on 
themselves and later igniting it. In such cases, 
severe burns may be seen on head, chest and 
abdomen. Legs and feet are spared. Presence of a 
large amount of soot particles in respiratory passage 
may be seen. 


Homicidal burns are also common in women. 
Where mother-in-law along with other relatives 
including husband torch the young bride. Many 
such homicidal burns are reported due to unfulfilled 
dowry demands. 

LIGHTNING 

Lightning is a natural phenomenon which may 
occur between clouds, and clouds and ground. The 
lightning stroke is a great discharge of current 
ranging from 10,000 to 2,00,000 amperes occurring 
in a fraction of a second with a potential of up to 
20 million volts. Lightning always follows the path 
of least resistance. So the branching of current 
waves can be seen. In lightning, a great amount of 
heat is also liberated. According to Spencer, 
following are the four factors in a lightning flash 
which affect human body and its surroundings: 

1. The direct effect of high voltage current 

2. Burning by superheated air 

3. Effect of expanded and repelled air 

4. Sledge-hammer and blow dealt by 
compressed air pushed before the current. 

Effects of Lightning 

In fatal cases where lightning strikes a person, he 
may become unconscious immediately due to 
sledge hammer blow of compressed air. He may 
receive burns, and passage of electricity causes 
immediate failure of nervous system or heart and 
the person may die immediately. In non-fatal cases, 
he may have burn injuries and may complain of 
giddiness and tinnitus. 

Medico-legal Significance 

Sudden death due to burns may raise suspicion 
regarding death. But scene of crime visit pays much 
dividend. Presence of metallic substance getting 
magnetised and associated history of rain with 
lightning may solve the riddle. 


CFMT-11 (3rd Proof).p65 


73 


8/12/07, 9:35 AM 


















74 Concise Textbook of Forensic Medicine and Toxicology 


ELECTRICITY 

Deaths due to electricity are quite common in rainy 
season. The deleterious effects of electricity depend 
on following factors: 

1. The Nature of Current: High voltage 
currents are very dangerous to life. Even low 
voltage currents of high amperes are 
dangerous. Alternating currents are more 
dangerous than direct currents as they 
produce contraction of muscles by which a 
person is not able to release the grip on the 
wire through which the current is flowing. 
The domestic supply is 210-220 volts 
alternating current. The current up to 50 
volts does not produce deleterious effects. 
Various cases have been reported where 
people have survived very high voltage 
current also. 

Judicial electrocution or electric chair: 
This form of execution is quite common in 
Europe, and America and other countries. 
In this, the person is made to sit on an iron 
chair with shaven head and is strapped. A 
high voltage current, about 1800 volts, is 
passed through his head twice for about 60 
seconds. One electrode is kept on his shaven 
head and one on leg. 

2. Resistance of Body : The deleterious effects 
of electricity also depend upon the amount 
of resistance offered by the body. The 
human body is a bad conductor of 
electricity, but if wet, resistance is decrea¬ 
sed. If a person is wearing wet clothes or 
carrying a metallic article touching the 
ground or where he is not wearing shoes, 
the body offers less resistance and the 
person may die easily with less current. 

3. Duration: Greater the duration of current, 
more the damage. Even low voltage current 
for a long duration can cause spasm of 
muscles and the person may not be able to 
release himself and die. 


Causes of Death 

Low voltage currents up to 220 volts cause death 
by ventricular fibrillation while midvoltage currents 
up to 1000 volts cause ventricular fibrillation and 
respiratory centres failure. High voltage current 
above 1000 volts causes direct respiratory centres 
failure. Delayed death may occur due to infection, 
paralysis, etc. 

Symptoms 

In non-fatal cases, tingling, shocks and severe 
muscular contraction or spasm are features when a 
person first touches an electric source. Burns may 
be found at the point of entrance of electricity or 
point of exit. These burns are caused as these points 
offer maximum resistance. Skin may also split due 
to burns. The pallor on face, dilated pupils and 
confusion may be seen on the person. Sometimes, 
cataract may be seen. Headache and loss of memory 
may be seen in later stages. 

Treatment 

The person should be removed immediately from 
the point of electrocution by adopting safety 
techniques like wearing of gloves, etc. He should 
be resuscitated immediately as he may be having 
ventricular fibrillation. Supportive measures like 
oxygen, etc. should be started. The person should 
be carefully followed up. 

Post-mortem Findings 

1. Joule Burn or Endogenous Burns: These 
are characteristic electric marks found on 
the skin. They are round with a shallow 
crater surrounded by a slightly raised ridge 
of skin with a grey ashy base. Clouding of 
cornea, cataract, retinal haemorrhages, 
memory loss, convulsions, paralysis, 
deafness, dumbness, headache, etc. may be 
seen in many cases. 


CFMT-11 (3rd Proof).p65 


74 


8/12/07, 9:35 AM 


















Injuries from Burns, Scalds, Lightning and Electricity 75 


2. Filigree Burns: They are reddish brown 
arborescent markings (superficial burns) 
on the skin. These are erythemas which 
may show the path of passage of electric 
current in dendritic fashion. These are 
typical of lightning. They disappear in a few 
days. 

Besides these, singeing of hair, blisters 
etc. may be seen. The clothes where 
lightning enters may be burnt. Metallic 
articles like keys, belt buckle or part of 
pen may be found magnetised. Rigor mortis 
may start early and pass off early. The 
findings mentioned above may be seen. 
The internal findings are not characteristic. 
There may be extensive congestion in brain. 
Internal organs are found to be congested. 
Rupture of ear drums may be seen and 
it may resemble the shape of the object 
through which electricity enters. 
Microscopically, honeycomb vacuolisation 
of keratin may be seen. Bullae may be 
present in and under the epidermis. 
Epidermal nuclei at the periphery appear 
hyperchromatic, distorted and fusiform 
showing a streaming pattern. Joule Burn 
is typical of electrocution. Metallic particles 
may be demonstrated in the burn area. 


Flash Burns 

When a person comes near the high voltage current 
due to proximity, the current jumps from source to 
body area and involves large area of skin. These 
are called ‘flash burns’. 

The face is usually pale, eyes are congested in 
most cases. Burns may be seen at the point of 
entrance and exit. Sometimes, burn at the point of 
exit may not be there as it is large in area. 

Internally most of the organs are found to be 
congested. Tardieu’s spots may be seen in brain 
and other organs. There are no other significant 
internal findings. 

Medico-legal Significance 

Most of the deaths are accidental as the person 
comes under contact with the electric source. 
Suicidal death and homicidal deaths by 
electrocution are also reported. 

Visit of the crime scene is very essential to 
know the mode of death. Examination of electric 
source by engineers may suggest whether the 
leaking is tampered with or not. 

Iatrogenic Electrocution 

The person may also get electrocuted or sustain 
burn injuries by accidental exposure to X-rays or 
nuclear radiation in a hospital. 


CFMT-11 (3rd Proof).p65 


75 


8/12/07, 9:35 AM 


















CHAPTER 

Injuries by Mechanical Violence 


DEFINITION OF MECHANICAL INJURY 

The mechanical injury is defined as “damage to 
any part of the body due to application of 
mechanical force”. This damage may cause loss of 
tissue. The injury which is associated with loss of 
tissue is usually referred to as wound. The other 
common types of injuries are contusions or bruises 
and/abrasions. 

Bruises or Contusions 

These are caused by application of blunt force like 
lathi, fall from height, road traffic accident, hit with 
a hard object like stone, hammer (Fig. 12.1), etc. 
Due to the application of force on the skin, the 
underlying subcutaneous blood vessels rupture, 
which causes extravasation of blood in 
subcutaneous tissues.This is called ‘ecchymosis’. 
There is no discontinuity in the outer layer of the 
skin. Bruises are quite painful. The sites of bruises 
are quite tender and swelling can be seen. 

Ecchymosis is observed over the seat of injury 
in 1-2 hours, although it may appear early where 
the skin is very thin as of scrotum and eyelids. 
Sometimes, ecchymosis is seen after 1 or 2 days if 
the deeper tissues are involved. 

Sometimes ecchymosis is seen quite away from 
the seat of injury, e.g. in scalp. Here they may 
gravitate into eyelids, commonly called black eye. 
Extent of ecchymosis is dependent on following factors: 



Fig. 12.1 Hammer. 


1. Nature and severity of force. 

2. Vascularity of area. 

3. Amount of subcutaneous fat. 

4. Looseness of underlying cellular tissues. 

5. Medical condition of the victim. 

The more severe the force is, more severe are 
the contusions. Ecchymosis is severe in soft tissues 
like eyelids, scrotum and vulva where vascularity is 
very high. In places where subcutaneous fat is more 


CFMT-12 (3rd Proof).p65 


76 


8/12/07, 9:54 AM 




















Injuries by Mechanical Violence 77 


like abdomen, ecchymosis is less appreciated. If 
underlying tissues are loose like those in scalp, 
ecchymosis may be seen at distal places. In children, 
bruises are easily produced due to delicate skin. In 
women and old persons the bruises are easily 
produceable as compared to young men. In bleeding 
disorders like purpura, scurvy, haemophilia and 
pathological condition like leukaemia, there is a 
tendency to bleed more in bruises. 

Severity of Bruises 

Bruises are simple injuries in most of the cases. 
However, if a person receives multiple bruises like 
in severe beating as in police custody, he may die 
as a cumulative effect of shock due to pooling of a 
lot of blood in various areas. 

Age of Bruise 

The ecchymosis present in the bruise undergoes 
various changes and this causes calour changes in 
it. It is due to disintegration of red blood cells, which 
releases haemoglobin, which, in turn, is subjected 
to enzyme changes. These changes start at the 
periphery of the bruise and later move to the centre. 
The bruises are red at first but in 3 days they appear 
blue, bluish black or brown. In 5-6 days, they 
become greenish. They become yellow from 7 th day 
onwards and remain so till 12th-14th day. In about 

Table 12.2 Differences between true and artificial bruise 


a fortnight, skin gains its normal appearance (Table 
12.1). The colour changes are well appreciated in 
fair persons as compared to dark persons. In healthy 
persons, age changes are faster as compared to sick 
persons. Ecchymosis situated in deeper tissues do 
not show changes in superficial skin. 


Table 12.1 Bruises and time since injury 


Time 

Changes 

Fresh 

Bright Red 

Up to 3 days 

Bluish 

4th day 

Bluish black/brown 

4th-5th day 

Greenish 

7 th-12th day 

Yellowish 

2 weeks 

Normal 


Medico-legal Importance of Bruises 


The bruises may be accidental, suicidal, or a 
homicidal in nature. The shape and size of bruise 
generally correspond to the object. So, the object 
such as lathi, rope, cycle chain, etc. can produce 
patterned bruises, from which the weapon can be 
identified. 

Bruises may be artificially produced to level 
false charges against someone (Table 12.2). These 
false bruises are produced by irritants like juices 
from marking nut, root of chitra, etc. The marks 
produced by application of such juices looks like 
contusions but they are dark brown in colour with 


Features 

True bruise 

Artificial bruise 

1. Cause 

Blunt trauma 

Usually chemical 

2. Site 

Any part of the body 

Approachable area 

3. Colour 

Colour changes with time 

Usually fresh, dark brown 

4. Shape 

May be according to 
the causative weapon 

Irregular 

5. Margins 

Not regular 

Vesicles may be seen, margins regular 

6. Local inflammation 

May not be seen 

Local changes seen 

7. Itching 

No 

Usually present 

8. Migration 

May migrate to other areas 
e.g. black eye 

No migration seen 

9. Contents 

Blood 

Acid serum 

10. Chemical Test 

Negative 

Chemical may be demonstrated 


CFMT-12 (3rd Proof).p65 


77 


8/12/07, 9:54 AM 
























78 Concise Textbook of Forensic Medicine and Toxicology 


Table 12.3 Characteristic features of ante-mortem and 
post-mortem bruises 



Ante-mortem bruises 

Post-mortem bruises 

1 . 

Colour changes present 

Absent 

2. 

Superficial and deep 

Usually superficial 
only 

3. 

Ecchymosis is more 

Very less 

4. 

Signs of inflammation and 
other vital reactions seen 

Absent 

5. 

On microscopic exami¬ 
nation, such changes 
and other changes can be 
demonstrated 

No infiltration of leuco¬ 
cytes 


margins covered with tiny vesicles and surrounding 
skin red and inflamed. If scrapping is taken, the 
substance can be demonstrated easily. Since these 
irritants cause a lot of scratching, such marks can 
be seen. These artificial bruises are always 
superficial and never deep (Tables 12.3 and 12.4). 

Abrasions 

Abrasions are injuries where there is discontinuity 
in the skin due to loss of superficial epithelial layer 
of the skin. These are produced as a result of blow, 
fall, slide or being dragged. 

The following are the different type of abrasions: 

1. Scratches: They are produced by a sharp 
weapon like needle or pin. 

2. Grazes: They are produced as a result of 
friction like fall on a rough surface. 


3. Pressure Abrasions: These are due to 
sustained pressure on the area just like the 
ligature mark in hanging, strangulation, etc. 

4. Imprint Abrasions: Sometimes, the pattern 
of the object is seen on the skin just like 
tyre marks or marks of radiator in road 
traffic accidents. 

5. Other Abrasions: Sometimes natural 
abrasions also occur like ‘nappy abrasion’ 
which is seen in infants due to excoriation 
of skin over areas usually covered by nappy 
like groin and buttocks. It may be confused 
with mechanical violence. 

6. Contused Abrasions: If more mechanical 
violence is used, the abrasion may be 
contused too, in such cases it may be 
referred to as contused abrasion or abraded 
contusion. 

Medico-legal Importance 

Abrasions may be simple in nature but medico- 
legally they are very important. The direction of 
the abrasion can be found out by observing heaped 
up epidermis at one end. Scratches are observed in 
strangulation and throttling. Grazes are commonly 
seen in fall on rough surface or a vehicular accident. 
The pressure abrasions are seen in asphyxial modes 
of death like hanging, strangulation, etc. Imprint 
abrasions are commonly seen in road traffic 
accidents. Teeth bites are simple abrasions. They 
are circular in shape represented by 2-4 separate 


Table 12.4 Differences between contusion and post-mortem lividity 


Features 

Contusion 

Post-mortem lividity 

1. Location 

Anywhere on the body 

Only on dependent parts 

2. Cause 

Mechanical forces 

Due to gravitation of blood in different 
parts 

3. Surface 

Elevation may be seen 

No elevation 

4. Colour 

Different colour changes may 
be seen with time 

Normally purple 

5. On cut section 

Extravasation of blood seen 
which cannot be washed off 

Blood comes out of cut vessels which can 
be washed off 

6. Signs of repair 

Reparative changes seen 

No such changes 


CFMT-12 (3rd Proof).p65 


78 


8/12/07, 9:54 AM 
























Injuries by Mechanical Violence 79 


marks caused by the upper front teeth on one side 
and same or less number of marks on the opposite 
side. Traces of saliva can be demonstrated easily if 
the samples are taken. 

Fabricated Abrasions: Sometimes abrasions are 
fabricated either by the person himself or with the 
help of another person to implicate someone. The 
abrasions are usually on approachable parts of the 
body like face, hands, abdomen, chest, etc. 

Age Changes in Abrasions 

Within 24 hours, abrasion surface is covered with 
reddish brown crust commonly called ‘scab’, due 
to coagulation of blood. This scab remains for about 
10-14 days, after which it falls off without leaving 
any mark due to the process of healing. 

Ante-mortem and Post-mortem Abrasions 

Ante-mortem abrasions are seen as bleeding 
surfaces and show time-related changes due to vital 
reaction of the body. 

Post-mortem abrasions are commonly seen on 
bony prominences due to dragging of the body. The 
base appears white, as circulation had stopped 
earlier. Invariably, there is no bleeding from the 
post-mortem abrasion and no sign of inflammation 
or reparative changes are seen on the base. 
Sometimes, after death, the body is attacked by ants 
and their marks may simulate ante-mortem bruises. 
Ant marks are usually seen around mouth, ears, 
vagina, anus, etc. 

WOUNDS 

The wound is defined as forcible disruption of 
continuity by mechanical violence of tissue of the 
body like skin, cornea, or mucous membrane. 
Commonly, wounds are classified as follows: 

1. Incised Wound: The incised wound is 
produced by a sharp weapon such as knife, 
razor, etc. It is always broader than the edge 


of the weapon causing it due to restriction 
of cut tissues. It is spindle-shaped and 
gaping. The length of the incised wound is 
greater than its depth. The edges are smooth, 
clean cut and everted. If an incised wound 
is caused by a heavy weapon like gandasa, 
the edges of the wound may show 
contusion. The direction of incised wound 
should always be noted. The comm¬ 
encement of incised wound is deeper and it 
gradually becomes shallower and tails off 
towards the end. The tailing off of an incised 
wound shows the direction by which the 
weapon was drawn off. The incised wound 
bleeds more, as the blood vessels are clean 
cut and hence bleed more. Small incised 
wounds on wrist may cause death due to 
excessive bleeding. 

2. Stab or Punctured Wounds: Stab wound 
is an incised wound where depth is more as 
compared to breadth. It is caused by sharp, 
pointed and cutting instruments. Stab may 
have both edges clean cut if the cutting 
instrument has sharp edges on both sides, or 
one side blunt and another clean cut if 
instrument had one sharp and other blunt side. 
Stab wounds are called penetrating wounds 
when they pass through tissues, enter a body 
cavity like thorax or abdomen. A sharp, 
pointed, cylindrical or conical instrument 
may produce a wound with circular margins. 
A blunt pointed instrument may produce 
circular margins with laceration. The depth 
of stab wound may be equal to or less than 
the length of the blade of the instrument 
causing it. In rare cases depth may be even 
more than the length of the blade as while 
forcing the instrument inside, the blow may 
depress the tissues of the part struck and the 
blade may reach deeper tissues. This is 
usually seen in stabs over the abdomen. 
Perforating Wounds: When punctured 
wound perforates the body there may be 


CFMT-12 (3rd Proof).p65 


79 


8/12/07, 9:54 AM 


















80 Concise Textbook of Forensic Medicine and Toxicology 


entry and exit wound. The wound of entry 
is usually larger with inverted margins and 
wound of exit is smaller with everted edges. 

3. Lacerated Wounds: The lacerated 
wounds are caused by application of great 
blunt force on the body, e.g. hit by lathi or 
blow, or in road traffic accidents. These 
wounds do not generally correspond with 
the shape or size of the instrument causing 
them. The margins are irregular, torn, 
swollen and contused. The underlying 
tissues show extravasation of blood with 
muscle tears. Fracture of bones may be 
seen. 

The lacerated wound as a rule do not 
bleed as heavily as incised wound because 
in this vessels are crushed and they bleed 
less. The lacerations are of the following 
types: 

(a) Split: Split laceration occurs when the 
soft tissues are caught between hard 
inside surface like bone and the force 
applied. Scalp lacerations are common. 


These lacerations sometimes look like 
incised wound with naked eye 
examination. So, they may be called 
‘incised-looking wound’. But on 
examination by lens, the margins can be 
observed. They are irregular, not clean 
cut as in case of incised wound. The hair 
follicles would be seen crushed, not cut. 

(b) Stretch laceration: They are due to 
over-stretching of skin by blunt force. 

(c) Avulsions: These shearing lacerations are 
caused due to grinding compression of 
force such as the wheel of a car passing 
over limbs, shearing a large area of skin. 

(d) Tears: When the body hits a hard object, 
it can produce tears, e.g. hit by a projected 
handle of a car in road traffic accidents. 

(e) Cut laceration: These are produced by 
heavy cutting weapon like gandasa. 
Here, careful examination would reveal 
margins that are irregular and not clean 
cut. The contusions may be seen around 
margins with crushed hair follicles. 


CFMT-12 (3rd Proof).p65 


80 


8/12/07, 9:54 AM 


















CHAPTER 

13 

Fire-arm Injuries 


Before knowing about fire-arm injuries, it is better 
to have an idea about fire-arms and ammunition. 

FIRE-ARM 

It is a weapon to cause injuries by use of gun 
powder. Every fire-arm, commonly called ‘a gun’, 
has a barrel which is long and hollow cylinder made 
of steel. The lumen of the barrel is called ‘bore’. 
The rear end of the barrel where cartridge is inserted 
or loaded is called ‘breech end’ while front end is 
called ‘muzzle ’. Missiles are loaded in the chamber 
situated at breech end. They are driven into the 
barrel by the detonation of explosive charges which 
form gases at high temperature and cause great 
pressure in the barrel, thus forcing the missile out 
of the barrel through the muzzle end. The projectile 
has maximum velocity when it leaves muzzle end 
and it is called ‘muzzle velocity’. By pulling the 
trigger, a hammer or pin is released which strikes 
over the percussion cap of the cartridge. It detonates 
the primar and fires the propellent charge which 
produces intense gases which carry the missile 
through the muzzle end. 

There are two types of fire-arm weapons 
commonly seen: smooth bored fire-arms or 
shotguns and rifled fire-arms. 


Smooth Bored Fire-arms or Shotguns 

These are heavy weapons earned over the shoulder 
and they have a barrel which is smooth bored inside. 
The shotgun may have one barrel or double barrel. 
These guns are usually used by police to control 
mob, or they are used in killing birds or small 
animals. 

In shotguns, barrel diameter is called ‘gauge’, 
while in rifles or handguns, it is called ‘calibre’. A 
shotgun gauge is indicated by the number of lead 
balls, each tightly fitting the barrel, and would 
weigh one pound. Common bores of shotguns are 
12 and 16 . The shotguns are loaded with cartridge 
whose construction is given in Figure 13.1. 



Fig. 13.1 Diagram of a hammerless shotgun. 


CFMT-13 (3rd Proof).p65 


81 


8/14/07, 3:53 PM 






















82 Concise Textbook of Forensic Medicine and Toxicology 


Shotgun Cartridge 

It is usually 5-8 cm in length. It consists of a card¬ 
board or plastic cylinder with a brass cylindrical 
head, with rimmed base with detonator cap situated 
in the centre. Below the detonator is the propellent 
charge. A greased wad or cardboard or felt wad is 
placed below the propellent charge. The shots are 
placed below the wad. The shots may be small, 
rounded lead balls, packed tightly. Below shots a 
greased wad or cardboard is there. 

Choking of Shotgun 

In order to control the spreading of shot pattern, 
narrowing of muzzle end can be done. This process 
is called ‘choking’. It may be of different degree, 
like full or half choke or quarter choke or improved 
cylinder. With choking, the spread pattern of shots 
is reduced and their effectiveness increased. 

Range of Fire-arm 

It is defined as the distance up to which the 
momentum of missile drops to the level that human 
penetration is not possible. It is different from 
‘useful range’, which is defined as the distance up 
to which the best results are achieved for 
penetration. 

Country Made Fire-arms 

Commonly called kattas, they are improvised 
shotguns usually of 12 bores made up of steel tubes. 
They are all unlicensed. They are widely made in 
India especially in Uttar Pradesh and Bihar. They 
are quite unsafe, as while firing they may burst also 
and kill the person who is firing them. The quality 
is very poor, but since they are quite cheap and 
easily available, they are quite frequently used. 

Rifled Fire-arms 

They are better than shotguns in efficiency. Rifling 
is a process in which spiral grooves are cut upon 



Fig. 13.2 Section of a rifled fire-arm weapon. 

the inner surface of the bore to impart rotatory 
motion to a bullet. It stabilises the bullet and gives 
greater accuracy and long range for the bullet to 
hit the target (Fig. 13.2). 

The rifled fire-arms are of the following variety: 

1. Rifles: It is also a shoulder arm gun 
designed to hit long distance. They can hit 
at a longer distance than shotguns. The rifles 
are classified as (a) slide action, (b) bolt 
action, (c) lever action, and (d) semi¬ 
automatic, depending upon the firing 
mechanism. Short barreled rifles are called 
‘carbines’. 

2. Hand Guns: They are fired from hand. 
Common examples are: 

(a) Revolvers: In this, cartridge or bullet is 
loaded into a revolving chamber at the 
breech end of the ban c I. It fires one shot 
at a time. Usually it has 5-9 chambers 
(Fig. 13.3). 

(b) Pistols: In this case, cartridge is directly 
loaded into the chamber of the barrel. 
Sometimes magazine is introduced into it. 


CFMT-13 (3rd Proof).p65 


82 


8/14/07, 3:53 PM 





























































































Fire-arm Injuries 83 


Front 



Pistols may be semi-automatic or 
automatic. In automatic pistols, bullets keep 
on coming out till the trigger is kept pressed. 

Cartridge of a Rifled Weapon 

It consists of a metal cylinder with a flat base. It 
may have a projected rim to fit in grooves of 


revolvers or pistols. The detonator cap which is an 
ignitor fits in a circular hole in the centre of 
cartridges. The distal end of the cylinder has a bullet 
which is made of lead or lead alloy with an outer 
hardening of steel or brass. The propellent charge 
lies between the bullet and the detonator cap 
(Fig. 13.4). 

Propellent Charge 

Two types of propellent charges are used: 

1. Black Powder: It consists of potassium nitrate 
(75 per cent), charcoal (15 per cent) and 
sulphur (10 per cent); in this case, charcoal 
acts as fuel. Potassium nitrate is oxygen 
supplier while sulphur makes it ignitable. One 
gram of the powder can produce 3000-4500 
cc of gases which consist of carbon dioxide, 
carbon monoxide, nitrogen, H 2 S, hydrogen 
and methane. 




(b) Shotgun cartridge 


Fig. 13.4 Construction of cartridge. 


CFMT-13 (3rd Proof).p65 


83 


8/14/07, 3:53 PM 




























































































84 Concise Textbook of Forensic Medicine and Toxicology 


2. Smokeless Powder: One gram of smokeless 

powder can produce 12000-13000 cc of gas. 

It may be of the following types: 

(a) Single base powder: The propellent 
charge is made of mainly nitrocellulose 
and some chemicals to stabilise it. 

(b) Double base powder: In this, 
nitrocellulose and nitroglycerine are the 
main constituents. It is more powerful 
than single base powder. 

(c) Triple base powder: It contains 
nitrocellulose, nitroglycerine and 
nitroguanidine. It is most powerful of the 
three types of base powders. 

Smokeless powder is better than black powder, 
as it produces more gas and no smoke. In pistols or 
revolvers mostly smokeless powder is used. 

Air Guns: In these, compressed air is used to fire 
lead shots. They are commonly used for killing 
birds or in sports like bursting balloons in a fair, 
etc. These lead shots have limited range. But if fired 
close to a human body, they can penetrate and if 
they enter into vital organs like heart, death can 
occur. It may damage the eyes also. 

IDENTIFICATION OF ALLEGED WEAPON OF 
OFFENCE 

Once the bullet fired and lodged into the body is 
recovered, the weapon from which it was fired can 
be identified. The bullet recovered from the body 
or the scene of crime is called ‘crime bullet’. It is 
known that once a bullet is fired from a fire-arm 
weapon, the marks of rifling and the characteristic 
individualities appear on the bullet, which are very 
specific to that weapon. 

A test bullet is fired in laboratory conditions 
from the alleged weapon of offence and markings 
on the bullet and individual characteristics are 
compared with the crime bullet. Once they 
resemble, it can be safely concluded that the alleged 


weapon has been used in the crime. The base of 
the fired cartridge can be used for study of striker 
indentation and can be compared with alleged 
weapon. 

The crime bullet should be handled carefully. 
It should not be lifted with forceps, or pincers, as it 
may produce marks on it. If needed, it should be 
lifted with covered pincers. The bullet should be 
preserved in a separate bottle. 

FIRE-ARM INJURIES 

Before we understand the fire-arm injuries, let us 
understand how they are caused. When a fire-arm 
is discharged, following things come out: 

1. Flame and Hot Gases: When a fire-arm is 
discharged, immediately a rush of gases at 
very high temperature leave the muzzle. A 
great amount of sound is also produced. The 
gases include nitrogen, carbon dioxide, 
carbon monoxide, etc. A flash of flame is 
also observed. 

2. Soot Particles and Powder Tattooing: 

Unburnt flakes of propellent also come out 
with gases and they are deposited on 
anything which is within their range of 
travel. 

3. Projectile: Bullet or lead pellets come out 
after gases and soot particles. They travel a 
distance according to their momentum. The 
pattern of fire-arm injuries depend on the 
distance between muzzle and victim. 
Accordingly, the entrance wound of the fire¬ 
arm is classified according to that. 

Wounds Produced by Rifled Fire-arms 

The following are the types of wounds produced 
by rifled fire-arms depending on the distance 
between muzzle and victim (Table 13.1). 

1. Contact Wounds: The following subtypes 
can be seen: 


CFMT-13 (3rd Proof).p65 


84 


8/14/07, 3:53 PM 


















Fire-arm Injuries 85 


Table 13.1 Features of entry wound in a case of rifled fire-arm when fired from different distances 


1. Contact 

(in touch with skin) 

2. Close shot 

2.5-7.5 cm from skin 

3. Near shot 
30-60 cm 

4. Distant shot 
More than 60 cm 


Largest size, stellate shape, blast effect, 
edge eversion seen, but blackening, tattooing, 
singeing, abrasion collar and grease collar missing. 

Bullet size entry wound, circular, blast effects absent, 
no edge eversion. Blackening, tattooing, singeing, abrasion 
collar and grease collar seen. 

Entry wound smaller than bullet size, circular in shape. 

No blast effects seen. Blackening and singeing almost absent. 
Tattooing, abrasion collar and grease collar seen. 

Entry wound smaller and circular. No blast effects seen. 

No blackening, tattooing, abrasion collar or grease collar seen. 


(a) Firm contact with skin with bone 
beneath: Such situation is seen when 
the fire-arm is held in close contact with 
the head. In this case the gases and 
projectile enter the skull through scalp 
but after resistance from the skull bone. 
Some amount of gases or parts of bullet 
may be reverted backward causing 
eversion of margins. In such cases the 
entry wound is seen as cruciate or star¬ 
shaped with everted, rugged margins. 
Since the discharge of the fire-arm enters 
skull completely, the underlying bone is 
fractured in multiple pieces with margins 
drawn inwards. The effect of flame and 
soot particles is seen around the entrance 
wound. 

(b) Firm contact with skin with no bone 
underneath: In such cases, the 
discharge enters completely into the soft 
tissue along with the bullet as there is 
no firm resistance. In both of the above 
cases, carbon monoxide present in the 
discharge enters tissues and combines 
with haemoglobin to impart pinkish 
colour to whole of the track. All along 
the track laceration of muscles, nerves 
and vessels is seen. Soot particles can 
also be seen along the track. The bullet 
may finally hit the bone or enter the 


cavity or may come out of body through 
exit wound. The muzzle imprint can be 
seen in some cases when the weapon is 
held against the head forcefully. 

2. Close-range Wounds: There is no definite 
distance of close range wounds but the 
distance is sufficient to produce flame and 
soot particles effect. The burning and 
singeing of hair around the wound is seen, 
if no clothings are present. Soot particles 
can be seen around the wound. It is more 
common with black gun powder than 
nitrocellulose. Unburnt powder particles of 
the propellent may produce tattooing of the 
skin. 

The presence of carboxyhaemoglobin 
can be demonstrated in diminishing 
concentration all along the track. The 
abrasion and contusion collar may be seen, 
but observed less easily due to effect of 
flame and smoke. 

3 . Short to Medium Range Wounds: In short 
range wounds, the effect of flame may not 
be present but tattooing due to powder 
deposition may be seen. In medium range 
wounds, the tattooing is not seen. The 
entrance wound is clearly observed. It is 
usually oval, margins are inverted and are 
smaller than the diameter of the bullet. The 
direction is inward and backward. The 
abrasion collar around the wound is seen 


CFMT-13 (3rd Proof).p65 


85 


8/14/07, 3:53 PM 




















86 Concise Textbook of Forensic Medicine and Toxicology 


as the margins are abraded. Sometimes, a 
contusion collar is also seen around the 
wound. The ‘grease or dirt collar’ may also 
be seen around the margins of the wound 
due to deposition of bullet lubrication or gun 
oil from the barrel of the gun. 

4. Long or Out of Range Wounds: Since in 
these cases, the body is away from the useful 
range of the fire-arm, the bullet does not 
have momentum to enter the body 
(Table 13.2). In such cases, laceration of the 
skin may be seen. 

Exit Wounds 

The exit wound is large in size as compared to the 
entry wound. The margins are everted. The tissue 
destruction is more and bleeding is more. The 
differences between entry and exit wound are 
presented in Table 13.3. 


There may be more than one exit wound as 
the bullet may break down into pieces and each 
piece may make its own exit wound. Sometimes, 
bullet may rupture bone into pieces which may also 
come out making more exit wounds. Sometimes, 
characteristic features of exit wound may not be 
seen as in such exit wounds. In a situation where 
the bullet is coming out through skin, the skin at 
that point is well supported like presence of belt, 
clip of bra, etc. which offers resistance. In such 
situations, the everted margins of exit wounds may 
not be clearly seen. 

Concealed Fire-arm Wounds 

The fire-arm wounds may be missed out if the 
wounds are present in axilla, groin, scrotum, 
perineal area and entrances of mouth, nostrils, ears, 
vagina and anus. Presence of hair especially in 


Table 13.2 Fire-arm discharge effects in relation to the distance travelled in case of rifled fire-arm 



Distance from body 

Effects 


1. 

Contact 

Blast effect, facial distortion, cherry red discolouration 

2. 

15 cm 

Heat combustion effects 


3. 

30 cm 

Soot particles 


4. 

60 cm 

Fine particles produce blackening 

5. 

90 cm 

Tattooing 


6. 

Effects of bullets 

Abrasion collar, grease collar, wounds of entry and exit 

Table 13.3 Difference between entry and exit wound of a fire-arm 


Features 

Entry wound 

Exit wound 

l. 

Size 

Usually small except in 

Bigger than entry 



contact wounds 

wound 

2. 

Edges 

Inverted 

Everted 

3. 

Abrasion collar 

Present 

Absent 

4. 

Contusion collar 

Present 

Absent 

5. 

Burning, singeing 
and blackening 

Present 

Absent 

6. 

Grease or dirt collar 

May be present 

Absent 

7. 

Clothes fibres 

May be seen 

Absent 

8. 

Carbon monoxide 

Can be detected in 

May be present but 



high quantity. Keeps on 

very less as 



decreasing as track passes 

compared to entry 
wound 


CFMT-13 (3rd Proof).p65 


86 


8/14/07, 3:53 PM 
























Fire-arm Injuries 87 


axilla, pubic area anal area may make wounds 
difficult to locate. 

Multiple Entry and Exit Wounds by One Bullet 

Sometimes, one bullet can make multiple entry and 
exit wounds. For example, if one bullet enters one 
arm and comes out; then re-enters chest and while 
coming out may enter another arm. 

Wounds Produced by Shotguns 

These are described in terms of distance between 
fire-arm and victim (Tables 13.4 and 13.5) as 
already done with rifled fire-arm weapons: 

1. Contact Wounds: The characters already 
described in rifled fire-arm weapons may 
be seen. In close contact with skin where 


underlying bone is present, there is a limited 
area of dissipation of discharge. So, extreme 
mutilation may be seen due to an explosive 
effect. Burning, tattooing is less seen at the 
site as the discharge enters the track and 
causes blackening and burning along the 
track. 

In situations where the close contact is 
there but no underlying bony resistance is 
seen, the blackening and tattooing may be 
seen around the wound. Most of the 
discharge passes into the fire-arm track 
causing soiling, burning of tissues along the 
track. 

2. Close Range: Close range is defined as 
when distance between muzzle and the body 
is within a few inches. In these cases, 


Table 13.4 Fire-arm discharge effects in relation to distance travelled in cases of shot gun 



Distance 

Effects 

1 . 

Contact and close shot 

Gaseous effect. Blow back effect. Cherry red discolouration around the 
wound of entry. 

2. 

15 cm 

Gun flame effect. Heat combustion effect on clothes, singeing of hair 
seen. 

3. 

30 cm 

Blackening due to soot particles 

4. 

60 cm 

Coarse particles causing tattooing. 

5. 

1.25-2 metres 

Cards/wads causing minor injuries. 

6. 

Effects of lead shots 

Wound of entry and exit seen in above cases. 

Table 13.5 Features of entry wound in relation to the distance of the fire-arm from the body in cases of shotgun 

1 . 

Contact shot 

Single shot. Largest size, irregular shape, edges scorched or contused. 
Blackening, tattooing and singeing present. 

2. 

Up to 15 cm 

Single shot, smaller size, circular shape, edges well defined and inverted. 
Blackening, tattooing and singeing present. 

3. 

90 cm 

Single entry wound, size 2.5- 4 cm, irregular lacerated margins, 
Blackening, tattooing present. Singeing absent. 

4. 

2 m 

Entry wounds may be multiple, spread is 5-7 cm. Central big wound 
with smaller wounds around. No blackening, tattooing or singeing seen. 

5. 

4 m 

Entry wounds multiple, spread area 10-14 cm, and shape wider. No 
blackening, tattooing and singeing seen. 

6. 

20 m 

Entry wounds multiple, spread area more than 14 cm. Spread is not 
measurable. No blackening, tattooing or singeing seen. 


CFMT-13 (3rd Proof).p65 


87 


8/14/07, 3:53 PM 























88 Concise Textbook of Forensic Medicine and Toxicology 


burning of skin and singeing of hair is seen. 
Soot particle deposition is seen. Powder 
tattooing is also seen. Rest of the features 
seen are those of a contact wound. 

3. Short Range to Medium Range: Depen¬ 
ding on the distance, the following effects 
are seen: 

(a) Flame/burning/scorching/singeing: 

May be seen from 30 cm to one metre. 

(b) Smoke/powder marks: May be seen up 
to one metre. 

(c) Tattooing: May be seen from 1 to 3 
metre. 

Spread of Pellets 

As the distance increases, the spread of pellets may 
be seen on the body. It is roughly estimated that 
spread in feet may correspond to distance in yards 
between the muzzle and the body. 

Depending upon the distance, the pellets may 
enter the body according to the momentum they 
have. If the distance increases more than the useful 
range, pellets may not enter the body. 

Shotgun Exit Wounds 

Shotgun exit wounds are rare, except in close contact 
wound. The exit wound may show the same feature 
as that in the rifled fire-arm weapon except that there 
may be many exit wounds due to multiple pellets. 

UNUSUAL PHENOMENON 

The following are the unusual phenomenon 
commonly seen: 

1. Ricochet Bullet: A bullet when entered into 
the body may get deviated due to hitting 
with hard object like bone and may follow 
another path. In such circumstances, the exit 
wound may be found at different places. The 
dissection of track from the entrance wound 
may reveal ricochetting of the bullet. 

2. Tandem Bullet: Word ‘tandem’ means one 
after another. It is also called ‘piggy’ bullet. 
Sometimes, due to some defect in firing 


mechanism or obstruction in the tunnel, the 
bullet does not come out after firing. When 
the next bullet is fired, both bullets come 
out one after another. In such cases, two 
entry wounds or exit wounds may be seen 
due to the two bullets. 

3 . Bullet Embolism: A bullet may enter blood 
vessels and thus enter circulation and may 
lodge at different places causing bullet 
embolism. Common sites through which a 
bullet can enter circulation are heart and 
aorta. 

4. Retained Bullets: Sometimes, a bullet is 
retained in the body for a long time. It may 
be because it was not removed as it was 
not causing much harm or it was located in 
an area from where its retrieval could cause 
more damage to the body. A bullet may 
remain in the body, especially spine, for 
years to come without causing any harm. 
Lead toxicity as a rule is not seen in cases 
of retained bullets. 

5. Dum-Dum Bullets: In these bullets tip of 
the jacket is cut off. As a result, they are 
expanding in nature. They are very 
destructive and produce large wounds. 

6. Blank Cartridge: It is just like an ordinary 
cartridge except that it has no lead shot or 
bullet inside. It contains ultrafast burning 
powder which detonates rather than burns. 
It is used mainly in riot control or on stage 
shows. It does not produce injuries but if 
shot in a very close range, the wad may 
produce laceration on the body. 

7. Rayalaseema Phenomenon: In this 
phenomenon, the person is killed by stab 
injury and then a bullet is planted inside the 
stab injury to mislead the investigating 
officer. Such cases were initially reported 
from Rayalaseema district of Andhra 
Pradesh, hence the name. Sometimes 
unfired or fired bullets are recovered from 
bodies during post-mortem examinations. 


CFMT-13 (3rd Proof).p65 


88 


8/14/07, 3:53 PM 


















Fire-arm Injuries 89 


8. Kennedy Phenomenon: It is also called 
‘Magic Bullet phenomenon or Souvenir 
Bullet’. It is an artefact. In this, sometimes, 
the doctor who conducts post-mortem may 
open entry wound of the fire-arm directly 
and features of the entry wound may be lost. 
It was done in the case of body of late US 
President John F. Kennedy who was shot, 
and the doctor who conducted the post¬ 
mortem directly opened the entry wound to 
remove the bullet. 

DETECTION OF GUN POWDER RESIDUE 

The following tests are performed to detect gun 
powder on the hands of a suspect: 

1. Paraffin Test: It is commonly called 
‘dermal nitrate test’ and is used for detection 
of gun powder on the hands of the suspect. 
Hands are coated with a layer of paraffin. 
After cooling, paraffin casts are removed 
and then treated with solution of 
diphenylamine. A positive test consists of 
blue flecks due to presence of nitrates and 
nitrites on the hand. However, the test may 
be false positive if nitrates or nitrites are 
present on the hands due to any 
contamination. This test is now not done. 

2. Harrison and Gilroy Test: It is a colori¬ 
metric test to detect presence of barium, 
antimony and lead on the hands of a suspect 
who has fired. It is also not done nowadays. 

3 . Modern Tests: The following are generally 
accepted methods for detecting gun powder 
on the hands of a suspect who has fired: 

(a) Neutron activation analysis: A sample 
is prepared either by washing hands with 
nitric acid or by applying paraffin cast. 
It is then exposed to radiation of 
neutrons. Secondary radio-activity is 
induced due to presence of metallic 
elements like barium, antimony or lead. 
This is a very sensitive test. 


(b) FASS (flameless atomic absorption 
spectrophotometry): This is a very 
sensitive test. The test can detect lead, 
antimony and barium. A sample is 
obtained as described by hand washing 
with acid. Usually four swabs are taken, 
and the fifth one is taken as control. It is 
worth mentioning that residue is never 
detected on the firing hand if a rifle or 
shotgun is used. In these cases, it is 
detected on the non-firing hand that was 
used to steady the barrel. Residue is 
detected more commonly on the back 
of the hand rather than the palm of the 
nonfiring hand. 

(c) SEM-DEX (scanning electron 
microscope-energy dispersive X-ray 
spectrophotometry): The residual 
material is removed from hands and 
scanned with electron microscope for 
gun powder residue. X-ray analysis is 
done to identify metallic ions. This 
method is very time consuming and 
costly, but can detect in very low 
quantities. Demonstration of carbon 
monoxide can also be done to establish 
the presence of gun powder in the track. 

POST-MORTEM EXAMINATION 

The following steps should be taken especially 
while conducting post-mortem examination in 
cases of fire-arm injuries: 

1. The photograph of the deceased is taken 
without removing clothes. A front and back 
view is desirable. 

2. Examination of clothes should be done 
carefully. Loose bullets may be present in 
clothes. Entry and exit marks on clothes 
should be noted and described. They should 
be matched with corresponding marks on 
the body. Clothes should be removed 
preferably without cutting. 


CFMT-13 (3rd Proof).p65 


89 


8/14/07, 3:53 PM 


















90 Concise Textbook of Forensic Medicine and Toxicology 


3. Once the clothes are removed, all the 
wounds of the body should be photographed 
again. 

4. X-rays of the body in front view and side 
views should be taken to locate the bullet. 

5. Hand washing with nitric acid and finger 
nail scrapping should be preserved for 
detection of gun powder residue. 

6. All the entry and exit wounds should be 
described clearly by noting their size, shape, 
direction and position. 

7. The track of all fire-arm injuries should be 
clearly described in detail. 

8. The bullet, if found in body, should be 
removed gently by non-piercing forceps and 
sealed separately. Maximum number of 
pellets that can be collected should be 
gathered and preserved. 

BOMB BLAST INJURIES 

Bomb blast injuries are quite common these days. 
Due to heightened terrorism, now civilians are 
exposed to bomb blast injuries which soldiers 
suffered during wartime or crossfire at borders. The 
blast injuries can affect human body in following 
ways: 

1. Disruptive Effect: It affects the person who 
is quite close to bomb. When bomb 
explodes, the person may be blown into 
pieces. If the victim is a bit far away, he 
may have his limb blown off. These 
disruptive injuries are quite extensive and 
victim dies immediately. 

2. Shock Wave: It is also called ‘air blast’. 
As a result of blast a zone of compressed 
air is created and it travels further. This wave 
of compression is followed by a wave of 
negative pressure. So, the victim bears first 
impact of compressed air and then negative 
pressure. The high pressured compressed air 
can knock down a person easily. This wave 
causes maximum damage to lungs. It leads 
to disruptive effect causing rupture of 


alveolar septa and cause haemorrhage in 
alveoli. The air passages are filled up with 
blood and fluid. The fluid in the alveolar 
space can cause respiratory failure. These 
injuries are sometimes referred to as ‘blast 
lung.’ 

The shock wave also causes damage to 
ears. The tympanic membrane is ruptured. The 
alimentary system also suffers damage due to 
the pressure of air. The stomach and intestine 
may rupture. The solid tissues like liver, 
kidneys, etc. resist the impact of shock wave 
better than hollow organs like stomach 
containing air. 

3. Burns: When a bomb is exploded, the 
temperature reaches around 2000°C and 
heated gases are released. They produce 
burns on victims who are in vicinity of the 
bomb blast. The exposed areas of the body 
are severely affected as compared to the 
covered ones. 

4. Flying Missiles: These may originate from 
bomb itself as some bombs contain metal 
pins, small metal balls or metallic nails 
which act as missiles and cause injuries to 
all those present around the site of the bomb 
blast. Sometimes, as a result of shock wave, 
small objects may also be thrown as missiles 
and may cause injuries. The small pins or 
metal nails used in the bomb may cause 
multiple abrasions and lacerations due to 
these flying missiles. 

5. Falling Masonry: Sometimes a bomb blast 
in a building may result in its collapse due 
to shock wave and persons may be caught 
in the falling debris. People may suffer 
traumatic asphyxia once caught in the 
debris. They may sustain head injury or 
other injuries due to falling stones. 

6. Asphyxia: In bomb blast, a lot of gases are 
produced which can cause asphyxia, if the 
explosion has occurred in a closed area. 
Common gases are carbon dioxide, carbon 
monoxide, and hydrogen sulphide. 


CFMT-13 (3rd Proof).p65 


90 


8/14/07, 3:53 PM 


















Fire-arm Injuries 91 


Post-mortem Examination 

The post-mortem examination of bomb blast cases 
should be carefully done, and following guidelines 
should be followed: 

1. Identification: It poses serious problems as 
bodies are mutilated and disfigured. 
Sometimes, even pieces of various bodies 
may be found together. In all such cases, 
first the reconstruction of bodies should be 
done, by organs. The number of heads show 
the number of persons killed. The soft parts 
should be carefully collected and applied 
in anatomical positions to know the side to 
which they belong. 

Further identification can be done by: 

(a) X-ray examination of skull and then 
subjecting to super-imposition technique. 


(b) Matching dental record if previous 
records are available. Compare dental 
fillings and old fracture in dental 
record. 

(c) Preserving tissues, like parts of liver and 
bone marrow for DNA test to establish 
identity. 

2. Clothing: It must be thoroughly inspected 
and any pieces of explosives may be 
preserved. The clothes should be preserved 
and sent for forensic science laboratory. 

3. Injuries: All injuries should be carefully 
noted. Any missing parts should be clearly 
mentioned in post-mortem report. 

4. The cause of death should be ascertained 
taking into consideration all injuries. 
Usually shock is the cause of death. Death 
may be instant if the person is blown into 
pieces. 


CFMT-13 (3rd Proof).p65 


91 


8/14/07, 3:53 PM 


















CHAPTER 

Medico-legal Aspects of Wounds 


MEDICO-LEGAL RESPONSIBILITIES OF A 
MEDICAL PRACTITIONER 

Definitions of a Medico-legal Case 

It is a case of injury or ailment where an attending 
doctor after taking history and conducting clinical 
examination of the patient, thinks that some kind 
of investigation by law enforcing agencies is 
essential so as to fix responsibility regarding the 
case in accordance with the law of the land. 

Registration of a Case as Medico-legal 

It is purely the responsibility of the attending doctor 
to register the case at the earliest. If some delay 
occurs, the case can be made medico-legal at any 
time. However, doctor should not act as a detective. 
The main duty of the doctor is to observe and record 
things correctly. The request of the patient or 
relative/friend for not registering the case as 
medico-legal should not be entertained. The 
medical officer has to make his own decision. 

Can Treatment be Refused to a Medico-legal 
Case? 

Although private practitioners have the choice to 
select patients, all doctors are ethically bound to 
render their services in emergency cases without 
any consideration whether a case is a medico-legal 


one or not. However, doctors working in 
government hospitals, government-aided private 
hospitals or nursing homes, and charitable clinics 
have no choice and they cannot refuse any case 
because it is a medico-legal one. 

Formalities to be Completed in a Medico¬ 
legal Case 

If any case registered as medico-legal in one 
hospital, dispensary or clinic is referred to another 
hospital, a fresh injury report need not be prepared 
even though the case may be labelled as a medico¬ 
legal one. The referral slip should be attached to 
the medico-legal report form. It is important to 
remember that treatment of every medico-legal case 
takes precedence over medico-legal formalities if 
the patient is serious. In all cases, medico-legal 
report as prescribed by local administration must 
be filled up correctly. 

CASES TO BE LABELED AS MEDICO-LEGAL 

The following cases should be labelled as medico¬ 
legal: 

1. Roadside accidents, factory accidents or any 
other unnatural mishaps. 

2. Suspected or evident homicides or suicides 
including attempted ones. 

3. Suspected or evident poisoning. 


CFMT-14 (3rd Proof).p65 


92 


8/12/07, 9:36 AM 



















Medico-legal Aspects of Wounds 93 


4. Burn injuries due to any cause. 

5. Injury cases where foul play is suspected, 
if a doctor thinks that the patient is an 
accused or a victim in a criminal case. 

6. Injury cases where there is a likelihood of 
death in near future. 

7. Suspected or evident sexual offenses. 

8. Suspected or evident criminal abortions. 

9. Unconsciousness, when the cause of 
unconsciousness is not clear. 

10. Cases brought dead with improper history. 

11. Cases referred by courts. 

HOW TO COMMUNICATE TO POLICE 

Law of the land requires that the doctor should give 
information to the police at the earliest in cases of 
medico-legal cases. All the doctors working in the 
hospitals can give it to the police constable posted 
in the hospital. 

All private practitioners are advised to keep 
the telephone number of local police station with 
them. When informing the police on telephone, they 
should always note down the diary number given 
by police in their records. 

If the local police station does not give a diary 
number, it is better to telephone police control room 
at telephone number 100 and ask for diary number. 
The diary number can save the doctor from 
harassment/litigation later on, if he is accused that 
he has not discharged his duty. 

Failure to Communicate to Police 

A doctor can be charged under Section 201 of the 

I.P.C. for destruction of evidence if he fails to 
discharge his duty to inform the police in time. 

PRESERVATION OF TRACE EVIDENCES 

All clothings worn by the injured patient should 
be preserved carefully. Similarly, gastric lavage, 
bullets, pellets, weapons removed from the body 
of the patient must be preserved carefully and sent 


to police under a sealed envelope. All X-rays should 
be preserved and handed over to the police under 
proper receipt. 

OPINION 

It is the most important aspect but is often taken 
lightly. The doctor has to opine whether the injury 
is simple or grievous, whether caused by a blunt or 
sharp weapon or whether is it a case of poisoning. 
For this, one should have complete knowledge of 
Section 320 of the I.P.C. which explains what is a 
‘grievous hurt’. 

Grievous Hurt 

Section 320 of the I.P.C. defines the following 
injuries as ‘grievous’, ‘rest’ are ‘simple’: 

1. Emasculation. 

2. Permanent loss of sight of either eye. 

3. Permanent loss of hearing of either ear. 

4. Privation of any member or joint. 

5. Destruction or permanent impairing of the 
powers of any member or joint. 

6. Permanent disfigurement of head or face. 

7. Fracture or dislocation of a bone or tooth. 

8. Any hurt which endangers life or which 
causes the sufferer to be during the space 
of 20 days in severe bodily pain, or unable 
to follow this ordinary pursuits. 

EXAMINATION OF AN INJURED PERSON 

A medical officer is called upon in a government 
or private hospital to examine an injured person 
and to treat and opine about the nature and severity 
of injuries. Every authorised government or private 
hospital as notified by the government, maintains 
a register called a ‘Medico-legal Register’ in their 
Emergency Department where the detailed 
examination report of the injured person is written. 
This register should remain in the custody of the 
in-charge of the Emergency Department. This 


CFMT-14 (3rd Proof).p65 


93 


8/12/07, 9:36 AM 


















94 Concise Textbook of Forensic Medicine and Toxicology 


register contains a performa called a ‘Medico-legal 
Report’ whose format is approved by the state 
government. 

Always, the medical officer should prepare the 
report as per the performa. It contains serial number 
of report, place, date and time of examination, 
name, age, sex, occupation, and address of the 
patient. It should be noted whether the patient came 
himself or was brought by relative or police. A brief 
summary of how the injured person sustained 
injuries should be noted. It is followed by detailed 
examination and description of the injuries. After 
noting down all injuries, the medical officer should 
make opinion about the nature and severity of 
injuries. Finally, he should put his signatures 
followed by his official seal. While noting down 
injuries he should carefully note the nature, number, 
characters of edges, length, breadth, depth and 
direction of injuries. 

Any foreign material, if found in injuries, 
should be carefully preserved. All the injuries 
should be measured accurately. While describing 
position, it is better that its distance from two bony 
points or anatomical landmarks is mentioned. 
Description should be so accurate that the medical 
officer can reconstruct the injuries on the body in 
court of law if required. Wounds of chest or 
abdomen should not be probed. 

Some Definitions 

According to Section 44 of the I.P.C. ‘injury’ is 
defined as “any harm whatever, illegally caused to 
any person in body, mind, reputation or property.” 

According to Section 319 of the I.P.C. whoever 
causes bodily pain, disease or infirmity to any 
person is said to cause ‘hurt’. 

Thus, we can say that in medical practice, we, 
most of the time deal with hurt rather than injury 
which has got more than one components. 

Legally, ‘wound’ is defined as any lesion 
external or internal, caused by violence with or 
without breach of continuity of skin. According to 
Section 351 of the I.P.C. ‘assault’ is defined as 


‘every attack or threat or attempt to apply force on 
the body of another in a hostile manner’. It does 
not matter whether the person gets injured or not. 

Hurt may be (a) simple or (b) grievous. 

1. Simple Hurt: All the hurts which do not 
fall in the category of grievous hurt are 
simple hurts. 

2. Grievous Hurt: Section 320 of the I.P.C. 
defines it as follows: 

(a) Emasculation: It means loss of 
masculine power. It may be due to 
cutting of penis or castration early in life, 
or injury to the spinal cord at the level 
of 2nd- 4th lumbar vertebrae. Castration 
or loss of testis in later part of life may 
not cause impotence in an individual as 
sex in human beings is partially a learned 
phenomenon. 

(b) Permanent privation of sight of either 

eye: If there is sight loss in either eye it 
would amount to grievous hurt. It is not 
necessary that there should be a 
complete loss of vision. Even if the 
vision changes from 6/6 or 6/5 to 6/9, it 
would be grievous hurt. 

(c) Permanent privation of hearing of 
either ear: Even if there is a slight loss 
of hearing in either ear, it would amount 
to grievous hurt. 

(d) Privation of any member or joint: 
‘Member’ of the body is defined as the 
part of the body which has got some 
distinct function to perform, e.g. mouth, 
nostrils, ears, eyes, hands, etc. Privation 
of any member or joint amounts to 
‘grievous hurt’. 

(e) Destruction or permanent impair¬ 
ment of the powers of any member or 
joint: If there is some permanent 
impairment in the powers of any 
member or joint due to injury it would 
amount to grievous hurt. 


CFMT-14 (3rd Proof).p65 


94 


8/12/07, 9:36 AM 


















Medico-legal Aspects of Wounds 95 


(f) Permanent disfiguration of the head 
or face: As it is well known that all 
incised and lacerated wounds heal by 
secondary intention and thus produce 
scar, presence of such scar would result 
in permanent disfiguration of face. If 
there is a big laceration on head, it can 
also cause loss of hair on a large area of 
scalp thus producing permanent 
disfiguration of head. Injury to nose may 
result in deviated nasal septum, which 
may also produce disfiguration on the 
face of a young woman. 

(g) Fracture or dislocation of a bone or 
tooth: Fracture should involve outer or 
inner table with or without displacement 
of any fragment of any bone. If the bone 
is cut, the cut should go uptill the 
medullary canal. Only in such cases it 
would amount to fracture. Dislocation 
of any bone like clavicle, humorous, etc. 
would also amount to ‘grievous hurt’. 
In case of tooth, mere loosening should 
be thoroughly investigated as it may be 
due to old age or bad oral hygiene or 
infection. In case of a dislocated tooth, 
condition of the gums and adjoining 
teeth should also be taken into account 
before giving opinion. 

(h) Any hurt which endangers life or 
which causes the sufferer to be, 
during the space of twenty days, in 
severe bodily pain or unable to follow 
his ordinary pursuits: This last clause 
has got three components: 

A. Any hurt which endangers life: Any injury 
which can cause sudden death, i.e. within 
24 hours of sustaining it, is called injury 
which endangers life. For example, 

(i) Rapid loss of blood pressure due to 
haemorrhage. 

(ii) Perforating injuries of chest, abdomen 
and skull. 


(iii) All head injuries showing signs of 
compression like vomiting, unconsci¬ 
ousness, etc. 

(iv) Superficial burns more than 80 per cent 
and deep burns more than 50 per cent. 

B. Any hurt which causes a person to be in 
severe bodily pain for 20 days would be 
grievous hurt. For example, a person may 
be badly beaten and may have contusions 
all over the body. In this case, all injuries 
are simple in nature but collectively they 
may be grievous as person may be in severe 
bodily pain for 20 days. 

C. Any hurt which causes the person to be 
hospitalised for more than 20 days and is 
unable to follow normal pursuits like 
bathing, eating, sleeping, etc., would 
amount to grievous hurt. Mere stay of 20 
days in the hospital would not constitute 
grievous hurt. Punishment of imprisonment 
up to seven years and fine is provided under 
Section 325 of the I.P.C. for voluntarily 
causing grievous hurt. 

Dangerous Injury 

Any injury which can pose imminent danger to life is 
called ‘dangerous injury’ and is a part of grievous hurt. 
For example, injury to large blood vessels, rupture of 
internal organs, etc. 

Injury Sufficient to Causes Death in Ordinary 
Course of Nature 

While admitting a charge under Section 302 of the 
I.P.C. of murder, it has to be proved that injury was 
sufficient to cause death in ordinary course of 
nature. The doctor is called upon to certify this. 
Any injury, if by virtue of its own direct effect can 
bring fatal result, is called ‘injury sufficient to cause 
death in ordinary course of nature’. For example, 

1. Injury to brain, spinal cord, large blood 
vessels. 

2. Rupture of stomach, intestine, heart, lung, 
liver, etc. 


CFMT-14 (3rd Proof).p65 


95 


8/12/07, 9:36 AM 


















96 Concise Textbook of Forensic Medicin e and Toxicology 


3. Extensive burns more than 80-90 per cent. 

4. Combined effect of many injuries producing 
shock. 

Injuries Necessarily Fatal 

The following injuries can be considered as 
‘necessarily fatal’ as recovery from them is 
impossible: 

1. Amputation of head 

2. Complete crush injury of head 

3. Amputation of both legs at hip level 

4. Complete crush injury of chest or abdomen 

Sometimes, it is not possible to give immediate 
opinion regarding the nature of injury. In such cases 
the patient should be kept under observation. If 
required, X-rays may be repeated or patient is re¬ 
examined after some time. Till the definite opinion is 
formed, the fact that the patient is under observation 
should be recorded in the medico-legal report. 

KINDS OF WEAPONS 

In medico-legal report it is important to mention 
the kinds of weapons used to inflict the wound. 
Whether the weapon is blunt or sharp should be 
decided after careful examination of edges, 
margins, ends, width and shape of the wound. If 
an alleged weapon used in inflicting injuries has 
been brought, it should be carefully examined. Its 
edges, length, breadth should be correlated with 
injuries. After examination, it can be opined 
whether injuries can be caused by such weapon or 
not. The weapon should be sealed again and then 
handed over to the police. 

AGE OF INJURY 

In the medico-legal report, it is essential to mention 
the age of the injury as it helps in investigation of 
the crime. The age of bruise can be ascertained by 
colour changes. The age of abrasion can be found 
out by the changes in scab formed over abrasion. 
The age of wound can be ascertained by observing 
following facts: 


The undivided edges of wound would be 
covered with lymph in about 36 hours. If no 
infection is present, the edges would join by 3 days 
and in 7 days wound would heal by primary 
intention by formation of red, tender and linear scar 
over the wound. If wound is not aseptic, it heals by 
formation of granulation tissue by secondary 
intention. The edges may be bound by blood and 
lymph and may show traces of pus in 36-48 hours. 
Such wounds take longer to heal or sometimes do 
not heal at all. 

Once the wound is covered with red scar, 
healing starts from below. Capillaries are formed 
in 36 hours and slowly the scar starts showing 
colour changes. It changes to dense fibrous scar in 
3-4 weeks. After 6 months, the scar becomes white, 
tough and glistening and the underlying tissues are 
completely healed. 

After 6 months, it is difficult to ascertain the 
age of the scar. The age of the scar can be 
ascertained by observing reparative process. Up to 
3 days, signs of inflammation and haematoma 
around fracture site can be seen. From 3rd day to 
14th day, a soft callus can be seen binding the two 
ends of the bone. This callus starts ossifying and it 
takes about 2-8 weeks. The ossification of callus 
is faster if there is less mobility at fracture site and 
fracture ends are immobilised after they come close 
to each other. In 6-8 weeks, the callus is replaced 
by the bone and fracture ends may be united. In 
skull fractures, very less callus formation is seen. 
In comminuted fracture, bone formation does not 
occur and line of fracture is mostly visible. In 
dislocation of tooth or removal of tooth by violence, 
bleeding from socket stops in 24 hours. The cavity 
of the socket usually fills up in 10 days and alveolar 
process becomes smooth in 14-21 days. 

CAUSES OF DEATH FROM WOUNDS 

The following are the causes of death from wounds: 

1. Immediate or direct causes 

2. Late or indirect causes 


CFMT-14 (3rd Proof).p65 


96 


8/12/07, 9:36 AM 


















Medico-legal Aspects of Wounds 97 


Immediate or Direct Causes 

These are haemorrhage, injury to vital organ or 
shock: 

1. Haemorrhage: It may be external or 
internal. External haemorrhage normally 
causes death due to loss of blood, causing 
fall of blood pressure ending into shock and 
finally death. External haemorrhage results 
from cutting of some big vessels like 
femoral or carotid artery. Sometimes, even 
a cut on radial arteries can cause death. The 
loss of about one-third of total blood can 
lead to death. The sudden loss of blood is 
more dangerous as compared to the same 
quantity lost slowly. Children, women and 
old persons can die from less quantity of 
blood loss as compared to adult males. 
Persons who are suffering from bleeding 
disorders like haemophilia can die because 
of small injuries. 

Internal haemorrhage may occur due 
to fire-arm or stabbing or hit by blunt 
weapons. A small haemorrhage in brain or 
heart can cause death. Commonly, the 
rupture of internal organs like liver, spleen, 
kidney, heart or lung can cause internal 
haemorrhage leading to death. Fracture of 
long bone like femur or tibia can cause 
internal haemorrhage sufficient to cause 
death. Any haemorrhage caused by injury 
several hours or days back, is called 
‘secondary haemorrhage’. 

2. Injury to a Vital Organ: Any severe injury 
to vital organs like brain, heart or lungs can 
cause immediate death. Any diseased organ 
like enlarged spleen can rupture with even 
minor injuries, leading to death. Crush 
injuries of vital organs like brain, heart or 
lung can cause death immediately. 

3. Shock: The death due to shock may be of 
following types: 

(a) Death due to primary or neurogenic 
shock: Sometimes, death may occur due 


to sudden fear or fright. It induces 
vasovagal shock or commonly called 
‘neurogenic shock’. A blow on the 
epigastrium or sudden fall in cold water 
may induce sudden cardiac arrest 
leading to death. 

(b) Death due to hypovolaemic shock: 

Massive haemorrhage may induce 
hypovolaemic shock leading to sudden 
death. 

(c) Death due to septicaemic shock: 

Sometimes, death may be delayed in 
injuries. As a result of assault on body, 
infection sets in. Toxins are produced 
which induce septicaemic shock leading 
to renal failure and ultimately death. 
Such death occurs in 3-7 days after the 
assault. 

Indirect or Remote Causes 

The following are the common indirect causes of 
death due to wounds: 

1. Infection: It is the commonest indirect 
cause leading to death. Encephalitis, 
meningitis or pneumonia may cause death 
rapidly. Infection of the wound may cause 
toxemia or septicaemia, leading to death by 
shock. Tetanus may also cause death. 

2. Gangrene of crushed injuries. 

3. Thrombosis in veins and consequent 
embolism can cause death. Pulmonary 
embolism can also cause sudden death. 

4. Fat Embolism: It is commonly seen in 
fracture of long bones and can cause death. 

5. Air Embolism: Injuries to neck vessels or 
penetrating injuries to thorax can cause air 
embolism. Sometimes, air embolism may 
occur due to tests being conducted to know 
patency of fallopian tubes by air sufflation 
techniques. Sometimes, in criminal 
abortions also, air embolism may occur 
when uterine veins are suddenly exposed 
to air. 


CFMT-14 (3rd Proof).p65 


97 


8/12/07, 9:36 AM 


















98 Concise Textbook of Forensic Medicine and Toxicology 


6. Death due to Supervened Disease 
Because of Trauma: Trauma sometimes 
leads to supervened disease like fracture of 
long bone may cause osteogenic sarcoma 
or abdomen injury may lead to hernia which 
may strangulate and ensures death. 

7. Death due to Medical Intervention: 
Sometimes, death may occur due to 
negligence on behalf of patient or doctor. 


The person may die because of improper 
medical care or neglect of hospital staff. 

ENZYME CHANGES IN WOUNDS AFTER 
INJURIES 

The following are the enzyme changes observed in 
wounds as a result of vital reaction. In order to under 




Alkaline 

phosphatases 


Acid 

phosphatases 


Amino 

peptidases 


Esterases 


ATPases 


(b) Appearances of enzymes 


Fig. 14.1 Enzyme changes in wounds. 


CFMT-14 (3rd Proof).p65 


98 


8/12/07, 9:36 AM 






































































































































Medico-legal Aspects of Wounds 99 


stand, injury area is divided into central zone 
(200-500 microns deep) immediately near the 
injury and peripheral zone (100-300 microns deep) 
around central zone. As a result of the damage, 
enzymatic activity is very low in central zone but 
high in peripheral zone. Within 5-15 minutes of 
injury, high concentration of histamine and 5-HT 
can be observed. Within 1 hour, concentration of 
ATPases and esterases rises. In 2 hours time, amino 
peptidases activity is seen. Acid phosphatases can 
be detected around 6 hours; alkaline phosphates 
activity is also seen at 6 hours (Fig. 14.1). 

Medico-legal Importance 

The medio-legal importance of wounds is as 
follows: 

1. Which Injury has Caused Death: The 

doctor is called upon to opine whether the 
injury is sufficient to cause death in an 
ordinary course of nature or not. In cases of 
multiple injuries, the doctor is faced with 
the situation where he has to specify the 
injury which has caused death. To sustain a 
charge of murder under Section 302 of the 
I.P.C. it needs to establish that the injury 
was sufficient to cause death in an ordinary 
course of nature. Sometimes, in cases of 
multiple injuries, one injury may not be 
sufficient to cause death but cumulatively 
multiple injuries may be sufficient to cause 
death in ordinary course of nature. In all 
such cases, opinion has to be given after 
considering all injuries (Table 14.1). 

2. Volitional Acts: Usually, after sustaining 
severe injury to vital organs like brain, lung 
or heart, the person collapses. But in some 
cases, many volitional acts have been 
reported by a person who received fatal 
injuries. Cases have been reported where 
injured person has come to casualty with 


intestines in hand or bullet in heart. Some 
persons have travelled a lot of distance or 
performed some heroic acts even when they 
were fatally injured. In all such cases, 
opinion should be given after considering 
all facts. 

DIFFERENCES BETWEEN SUICIDAL, 
ACCIDENTAL AND HOMICIDAL WOUNDS 

Whether the wound is suicidal, homicidal or 
accidental should be decided after consideration 
of following points: 

1. The characters and situations of wounds. 

2. The direction, number and extent of 
wounds. 

3. Circumstantial evidence. 

The Characters and Situations of Wounds 

(a) Suicidal wounds: They are usually situated 
on front of the body on approachable parts 
and usually affect vital area. They are 
usually incised, punctured or fire-arm 
injuries. Incised or penetrating wounds on 
the back or on nonaccessible area are 
usually homicidal. 

(b) Defence wounds: They are present on 
fingers, palms, forearm, back of hands, 
wrists or between fingers when a person 
tries to save himself from the assailant with 
the sharp weapon. These injuries are 
sustained also when person tries to catch 
the weapon of the assailant in attempt to save 
himself. The defence wound denotes 
attempt to murder. Bruises may be seen in 
place of cuts if the weapon is blunt. 

(c) Incised wounds: They are seen on face, 
ears, or genitalia show sense of severe 
jealousy or revenge or sexual jealousy. 


CFMT-14 (3rd Proof).p65 


99 


8/12/07, 9:36 AM 


















100 Concise Textbook of Forensic Medicine and Toxicology 


Table 14.1 Differences between ante-mortem wounds and post-mortem wounds 

Ante-mortem wounds 

Post-mortem wounds 

1. Very profound haemorrhage in incised wounds, 

Very less haemorrhage 

less in lacerated wounds 


2. Mostly arterial bleeding 

Mostly venous 

3. Spouting seen as a result of bleed from arteries. 

No spouting 

4. Clotted blood can be seen 

No clotting or soft clotting-current 


jelly or chicken fat 

5. Staining of edges deep. Removal with 

Staining quite less, can be easily 

water takes effort 

removed with water 

6. Gaping of wounds seen due to vital reaction 

No gaping seen 

7. Signs of inflammation seen 

No signs of inflammation seen 

8. In old wounds, signs of pus or reparative 

None present 

process seen 


9. Enzyme reactions can be demonstrated at site 

No enzyme activity 

10. No signs of putrefaction seen 

Signs of putrefaction may be seen 


Accidental incised wounds may occur 
if a person accidentally falls on a sharp 
object like knife or pin. Favourite sites 
of suicidal fire-arm wound are temple, 
in the centre of forehead, roof of mouth, 
chest or epigastrium. 

Usually, fire-arm is held very close or 
almost in contact with site and show 
characteristic blackening and tattooing. 
Weapon may be found held in hand due 
to cadaveric spasm. In homicidal or 
accidental fire-arm injury, wound may 
be present on any area. Lacerated 
wounds are usually accidental or 
homicidal. Accidental or lacerated 
wounds are seen on exposed parts of the 
body are usually on same side. Lacerated 
wounds on vertex are usually homicidal. 

The Direction, Number and Extent of 
Wounds 

Multiple severe injuries are mostly homicidal 
except in accidents like motor vehicle, fall or 
railway accidents. In sexual jealousy assaults, 


usually injuries are multiple and severe and may 
involve genitals (Fig. 14.2). 

Self-inflicted Wounds 

They are multiple, present on easily approachable 
parts of the body and are superficial. The purpose 
of self-inflicted wound is to implicate someone or 
to attract attention. Usually there are superficial 
linear cuts or scratches made by a sharp-edged 
weapon like knife, razor or pin. They are often 
parallel with straight regular margins. 

Hesitational or Tentative cuts 

Sometimes, more than one cut wound is present 
on the body. When a person is trying to commit 
suicide, he starts inflicting wounds but initially he 
is not able to inflict fatal wound. So, he initially 
gives one or more cuts which are not fatal, and then 
he gives the fatal cut. In initial cuts, tailing can be 
observed. Direction of injury can tell whether a 
person is right-handed or left-handed. Suicidal 
injuries over the chest are usually on left side and 
directed downwards and inwards. Those on upper 
limbs are usually directed from above 
downwards. Those on lower limbs are usually 


CFMT-14 (3rd Proof).p65 


100 


8/12/07, 9:36 AM 





















Medico-legal Aspects of Wounds 101 



Fig. 14.2 Cut throat with gandasa, see irregular 
margins. 

directed below upwards, those over abdomen are 
directed below upwards and inwards. If right hand 
is used, injuries would be seen over left side of 
body directed from left to right with greater depth 
on left and tailing off to the right with a downward 
sloping. In homicidal wounding, plane of 
disposition is usually horizontal or oblique sloping 
downwards or backwards. The direction of wound 
is dependent on relative position of victim and 
assailant. 

Circumstantial Evidence 

The examination of the scene of death is very 
important in solving whether death is suicidal, 
accidental or homicidal (Table 14.2). If the body 
has been found within a room locked from inside, 
it points towards suicide. The presence of suicide 


note may reflect his state of mind before death. The 
condition of clothes may show homicidal pattern 
if they are found torn or misplaced. Footprints in 
blood and blood trail may point towards homicidal 
attack. The signs of struggle in the form of displaced 
or broken furniture may point towards homicidal 
attack. The presence of foreign body like cigarette 
buts, fingerprints of a stranger, hair, etc. should be 
carefully noted. Due to cadaveric spasm, weapon 
may be seen firmly grasped in hand in cases of 
suicide. 

Dyadic Deaths: The term ‘dyadic death’ is 
used when a person kills someone and then commits 
suicide. It is mostly seen in family relations like 
husband-wife, father-wife-children, father and 
parents or brothers. The reasons may be infidelity 
in case of spouse, property disputes, unemploy¬ 
ment, poverty, or jealousy. 

Honour Killings: The victim of these 
homicides are especially females who defy parents’ 
wish and marry person of their choice out of caste 
or religion. They are brutally murdered by father 
or brothers who later surrender to police. Many such 
cases are reported from the Muslim community 
from India and the UK. The perpetrators of these 
homicides think that their daughters or sisters have 
brought disrepute to the community and family. 
Such thinking should be discouraged. 

SOME COMMON LAW DEFINITIONS 

For details see Appendix 2. 

Sec. 304 I.P.C 

States punishment for culpable homicide not 
amounting to murder. In this, punishment may 
extend to 10 years of imprisonment and fine. 

Sec. 498 A I.P.C 

Deals with harassment for dowry. Husband or 
relative or the victim can be punished for a term 
which may extend up to 3 years. 


CFMT-14 (3rd Proof).p65 


101 


8/12/07, 9:36 AM 


















102 Concise Textbook of Forensic Medicine and Toxicology 


Table 14.2 

Differences between suicidal and homicidal cut throat injuries 


Features 

Homicidal 

Suicidal 

1. Number 

May be multiple of different severity and depth 

Single or multiple deep wounds 

2. Tentative 

Absent 

Present 

cuts 

3. Tailing 

Either side 

Depends on whether the person is right 

4. Slope 

Away from the floor of the mouth 

handed or left handed. On right side, if 
the person is right handed 

Toward the floor of the mouth 

5. Position 

Lower part of neck 

Upper part of the neck 

6. Direction 

Usually horizontal 

Usually oblique 

7. Direction 

Usually upward 

Downward 

8. Position 

Usually cut as the wound is deep 

Usually intact as the wound may not be 

of carotid 


so deep 

arteries 

9. Bleeding 

Mostly arterial 

Usually venous 


Dowry Death (Section 304 B I.P.C.) 

Where the death of a woman is caused by any burns 
or bodily injury or occurs otherwise than under 
normal circumstances within seven years of 
marriage and it is shown that soon before her death 
she was subjected to cruelty or harassment by her 
husband or any relative of her husband for, or in 


connection with any demand for dowry, such death 
shall be called a, “dowry death” and such husband 
or relatives shall be deemed to have caused her 
death. 

All cases of dowry death should be investigated 
by the magistrate and post-mortem should 
be conducted by a panel of doctors from different 
hospitals. 


CFMT-14 (3rd Proof).p65 


102 


8/12/07, 9:36 AM 





















CHAPTER 

15 

Regional Injuries 


HEAD INJURY 

Head injury is the leading cause of death in road 
traffic accidents. It may also be caused in other 
accidents like fall from height and hit by blunt force 
as in homicidal attack. 

Scalp Injury 

Majority of injuries in India are accidental or 
homicidal. Very rarely, scalp injuries are suicidal 
in nature, mostly seen in lunatics. Accidental scalp 
injuries may be seen in vehicular accidents, fall 
from height or an object falling on the head. Most 
of the homicidal injuries are caused by hitting with 
blunt weapon like lathi or sharp weapon like sword, 
gandasa, etc. Scalp injuries may be contusion, 
incised or lacerated wound. In scalp, lacerated 
wound may look like incised wound. It is essential 
that edges of wounds be carefully noted as in 
incised wound the margins would be clear cut and 
hair bulb clean cut while in lacerated wound, the 
edges would be irregular and hair bulb crushed. 
Scalp injuries sometimes go unnoticed being hidden 
under the hair. Since scalp is a dense tissue, less 
signs of bleeding, swelling and other signs of 
inflammation are observed. Scalp injuries may be 
associated with underlying fractures or head injury. 

Contusions on scalp may be seen as 
haematoma in form of swelling which may be 
pitting on pressure or may be pulsating. Scalp 
haematoma may gravitate in front and may present 


as eye swelling commonly called ‘black eye’. Scalp 
injuries are mainly simple injuries unless a large 
amount of scalp loss is there which may cause 
disfiguration of head and thus, may amount to 
grievous hurt. Scalp injuries are better appreciated 
during post-mortem examination when scalp is 
reflected and injuries are viewed from inside. 

Spectacle haematoma: In this condition, the 
blood is collected in the soft tissues around the eyes 
due to fracture of the base of skull. 

Skull Fracture 

The fracture of skull can sometimes be seen without 
any injury on scalp. The fracture of skull depends 
on the type of weapon and force used. The following 
types of skull fractures are commonly seen: 

1. Depressed Fracture: It is due to direct 
impact of weapon on the skull where bone 
is depressed depending upon the force 
applied. Since the depression may resemble 
the weapon, this fracture is also called ‘fracture 
signature’ or fracture a la signature’. 

2. Comminuted Fracture: It is a case of 
depressed fracture where bone on fracture 
site gets broken into multiple pieces. The 
fragmented parts may get driven into the 
underlying brain tissue. If there is no 
displacement of comminuted fragments, the 
area looks like spider’s web or mosaic. 


CFMT-15 (3rd Proof).p65 


103 


8/14/07, 3:54 PM 


















104 Concise Textbook of Forensic Medicine and Toxicology 


3 . Pond or Indented Fracture : It may be seen 
in small infants and children where the skull 
is elastic. It may be produced by obstetric 
forceps during childbirth or hit by a blunt 
object. There may be indentation or simple 
buckling in of the skull. 

4. Gutter Fracture: It is due to flanking or 
grazing by the bullet which produces a 
furrow in the outer table of the skull. 

5. Linear or Fissured Fractures: They are 
linear cracks without any displacement of 
fragments of skull bones. The line of linear 
crack is very thin. They are usually caused 
by a blunt force with broad resisting force 
like fall on the ground or in road traffic 
accidents. 

6. Ring Fracture: This is a type of fissured 
fracture which encircles the base of the skull 
around the foramen magnum running 
3-5 cm outside foramen magnum at the 
back and sides of the skull. Such fractures 
are seen in the following cases: 

(a) Fall from height where a person falls on 
feet or buttock and the impact passes 
upward through the spinal column. 

(b) Fall from height where head strikes the 
ground first. 

(c) Fall of heavy load on head. 

(d) Violent twisting of head. 

7. Diastatic Fracture: A fracture is called 
diastatic when fracture line involves 
separation of sutures. They are commonly 
seen in children. These are caused due to 
broad impact of blunt force like fall from 
height, road traffic accidents, train accidents, 
etc. 

8. Basilar Fracture: Basilar fractures are 
fractures of base of the skull ranging from 
linear to a complex one. Basilar fractures 
are produced by heavy blunt forces like fall, 
road accidents, etc. 

9. Contre-coup Fractures: These fractures 
occur when head is not supported and is 


moving. In this, fracture is seen on 
diagonally opposite side of the skull. It may 
be depressed, fissured or crushed. Such 
fractures are common in road traffic 
accidents. 

Meningeal Haemorrhages 

The following are common types of haemorrhages: 

1. Extra-dural Haemorrhage: It is also 
called ‘epidural haemorrhage’ where 
bleeding occurs between inner surface of 
the skull and the dura mater. It is almost 
always traumatic in origin. Usually, this type 
of haemorrhage is unilateral. The region 
most commonly affected is temporoparietal 
area and the middle meningeal artery or its 
branch, or accompanying veins are ruptured. 
Sometimes, posterior meningeal artery may 
be affected and site of haemorrhage would 
be parietooccipital or frontotemporal. The 
clinical presentation of extra-dural 
haemorrhage sometimes varies due to lucid 
interval. 

Lucid Interval: Sometimes there is delay 
in onset of bleeding, which may be due to 
spasm of injured artery. It may range from 
30 minutes to 4 hours, to days. So the 
features of cerebral compression are 
delayed. 

The classic presentation is initially 
brief loss of consciousness following injury. 
The victim becomes conscious after 
concussion and may later collapse after the 
lucid interval when haemorrhage becomes 
of enough size to induce symptoms of 
cerebral comp-ression. Lucid interval has 
great medico-legal significance as during 
this time the victim is conscious and well- 
oriented and is legally fit to discharge any 
duties. The external haemorrhage cannot be 
appreciated by plain X-rays. Help of CT 
scan is required for the diagnosis. 


CFMT-15 (3rd Proof).p65 


104 


8/14/07, 3:54 PM 


















Regional Injuries 105 


2. Sub-dural Haemorrhage: Sub-dural 
haematoma may be traumatic or non- 
traumatic in nature. They occur mostly in 
age group of 50-60 years as compared to 
extra-dural haemorrhages, which mostly 
occur in 20-40 years. The following types 
of sub-dural haematomas are seen: 

(a) Acute sub-dural haematoma 

(b) Chronic sub-dural haematoma 

(a) Acute sub-dural haematoma: It is almost 
always traumatic and venous in origin. The 
various causes are: 

(i) Rupture of communicating veins. 

(ii) Tears in dural venous sinuses. 

(iii) Laceration of dura and tear of middle 
meningeal artery and bleeding occurs in 
subdural space. 

(iv) Old adhesions between dura and brain 
get ruptured. 

In acute haematoma, there is rapid 
accumulation of blood between dura and 
arachnoid membrane. It is mostly 
unilateral. It may be associated with 
brain injury. About 100-150 ml of acute 
sub-dural haematoma can be fatal. 

(b) Chronic sub-dural haematoma: These 
haematomas are usually seen in old persons. 
Due to old age, the subarachnoid space may 
increase due to reduction in brain size. This 
allows more movement of brain within 
cranial cavity. So, with greater acceleration 
or deceleration movement of skull there may 
be bleeding without producing clinical 
features. But occasionally, the haematoma 
may be encapsulated by fibrous tissues and 
may keep on increasing in size due to small 
recurrent haemorrhages from capillaries. 
Slowly, the size of sub-dural haematoma 
may keep on increasing to the extent that it 
produces clinical cerebral compression after 
months, or years. 


The clinical features of sub-dural haemorrhage 
may be like extra-dural haemorrhage where lucid 
interval may be seen. Due to the associated brain 
injury, the person may pass into shock immediately. 
Chronic subdural haematoma may raise medico¬ 
legal problems. It may be associated with previous 
history of trauma. 

Sub-dural hygromas are usually seen in 
infants or small children where features of sub-dural 
haematomas may be seen except, that history of 
trauma may not have been recorded and bleeding 
is quite small. It can develop as complication of 
meningitis, brain trauma or hydrocephalus. 

3. Sub-arachnoid Haemorrhage: It is the 

most common intra-cranial bleed following 
injury to brain. It may be traumatic or 
nontraumatic in nature. The non-traumatic 
reasons for this bleed are rupture of 
aneurysm of artery supplying brain or stroke 
where intracerebral haemorrhage slips into 
subarachnoid space. The traumatic 
subarachnoid haemorrhage may be due to 
direct trauma to brain, trauma on side of face 
and neck resulting in vertebral fracture with 
tearing of enclosed portion of vertebral artery 
or sudden hyper extension of head causing 
rupture of arteries at the base of skull. 

Usually, sub-arachnoid haemorrhage is seen on 
parietal and temporal lobes but can be seen 
anywhere if it is secondary to brain contusion or 
laceration. Sub-arachnoid haemorrhage has great 
medico-legal significance as rupture of berry 
aneurysm may occur due to intense physical activity 
in cases of assault. Rupture of Berry aneurysm can 
occur in natural course too, without any history of 
assault. 

CEREBRAL INJURIES 

The brain damage may occur due to following 
reasons: 

1. Direct Cause: When a foreign body like 
bullet, or some penetrating weapon enters 
the skull. 


CFMT-15 (3rd Proof).p65 


105 


8/14/07, 3:54 PM 


















106 Concise Textbook of Forensic Medicine and Toxicology 


2. Indirect Cause: Brain is almost 
incompressible but it gets damaged as a 
result of rotational movement in sudden 
change of velocity, acceleration or 
deceleration. Violent shaking of small child 
can causes sub-dural haemorrhage. 
According to Gurdijan and Holboum, cerberal tis¬ 
sue may get damaged because of following reasons: 

1. Compression of the various units of 
brain by their being forced together. 

2. Pulling apart of units by tension. 

3. Shear strain: It is defined as strain 
produced to cause adjoining parts of the 
body to slide relative to each other in a 
direction parallel to their places of 
contact. 

Coup and Contre Coup Injuries 

When an object strikes a stationary head it produces 
damage on underneath or at least on the same side 
of impact, it is called ‘coup injuries’. But when an 
object strikes a moving head, there may be a coup 
injury on the site of impact but the cortical damage 
is seen on the opposite side of the brain, which is 
called ‘contre coup’ injury. Such injuries are quite 
common in road accidents, fall from height, etc. 


cerebral injury and is always followed by amnesia 
from the actual movement of the accident.” 
Concussion is due to diffuse submicroscopic 
neuronal damage to reticular system. 

Concussion causes immediate uncons¬ 
ciousness or the person may feel giddy. It may last 
for seconds to a few minutes. Once the person 
recovers consciousness, he may feel some headache 
for some time. Memory loss about the incident is 
quite common. 

Post-concussion state is defined by headache, 
nausea, vomiting, unsteady gait, anxiety and mental 
fatiguability. The complete loss of memory of 
events before accident or during accident is called 
‘retrograde amnesia’ (Table 15.1). The concussion 
does not produce any significant post-mortem 
findings and is not fatal. However, neuronal damage 
can be appreciated on electron microscope. 

Cerebral Contusions 

When the integrity of cortical area is disrupted due 
to linear or laminar stresses on brain tissue, 
extravasation of blood occurs into the substance of 
the affected area. The area gets bruised and swollen, 
and is commonly known as ‘cerebral contusion’. 
The size of cerebral contusion may vary from 
punctate haemorrhagic spots to a large area. 


Concussion of the Brain (Commotio Cerebri) 

It is commonly known as ‘stunning’. It is a purely 
functional disorder, mostly reversible and is minor 
in nature. Trotter defined it as: “Transient paralytic 
state due to head injury which is of instantaneous 
onset, does not show any evidence of structural 


Cerebral Lacerations 

When tearing of brain occurs as a result of injury, 
it is called cerebral lacerations. These are common 
in an area which is in contact with bony area, so 
tips and under surfaces of temporal and frontal lobes 
are the common places. 


Table 15.1 Differences between concussion and drunkenness 


Features 

Concussion 

Drunkenness 

1. Smell 

None 

Alcoholic odour present 

2. Skin 

Pale, clammy and cold 

Flushed 

3. Pulse 

Slow 

Fast and bounding 

4. Pupillary reaction to light 

Brisk 

Sluggish 

5. Breathing 

Sighs and puffs seen 

Slow and irregular 

6. Memory 

Retrograde amnesia seen 

Confused but improves with time 

7. Behaviour 

Quiet, photophobic 

Abusive and uncooperative 


CFMT-15 (3rd Proof).p65 


106 


8/24/07, 3:21 PM 





















Regional Injuries 107 


Intra-cerebral haemorrhages: In severe head 
injury intra-cerebral haemorrhages occur 
immediately after the injury; they are called 
‘primary intra-cerebral injury’. 

Sometimes, stroke due to uncontrolled 
hypertension causes intra-cerebral haemorrhage, 
which may be mistaken as a traumatic one. 
Absence of either injuries in brain/scalp/skull may 
rule out any traumatic involvement. 

Punch drunkenness or goofy: It refers to 
chronic changes in the brain in boxers who receive 
minor head injuries while boxing. The injuries 
which boxers are likely to receive are sub-dural, 
sub-arachnoid and intra-cerebral haemorrhages, 
neuronal injury, focal ischaemic lesions, brain 
atrophy, etc. The main symptoms are loss of speed 
and coordination, slurred speech, memory loss, 
behavioural changes like mood vibrations, etc. 
Some may have pontine haemorrhage, which is 
called ‘boxer’s haemorrhage’. 

SPINAL INJURIES 

Spinal injuries are quite common due to vehicular 
accidents, falls and blunt trauma. 

Concussion of Spine or Railway Spine 

This condition is commonly seen in railway or 
vehicular accidents. There may be paralysis of 
upper and lower limbs or lower limb alone. 
Involvement of bladder and rectum is also seen. 
The person may have headache, giddiness and loss 
of sexual power. The person recovers in 2 or 3 days 
and also symptoms disappear. Minor external injury 
may or may not be there. 

This condition resembles concussion of brain 
and aetiology is, that it is due to momentary 
collision of spinal cord with walls of the spinal 
column. 

Hangman’s Fracture 

Injudicial hanging, anterior dislocation of cervical 


second vertebra results in instant death due to 
crushing of spinal cord. 

Whiplash Injury 

It is commonly seen in roadside vehicular accident 
where due to sudden stoppage of motor vehicle, 
there is hyperextension and hyperflexion of cervical 
spine at the level of fourth to eighth cervical 
vertebrae. As a result of this the spinal cord gets 
injured and the person can die at once. Persons who 
are having cervical spondylosis are vulnerable. 

Injury to Thorax and Abdomen 

They are commonly seen in adults. Children are 
less affected. The common chest injuries are: 

1. Concussion of chest. 

2. Contusions of chest causing pleurisy. 

3. Fracture ribs. 

4. Flail chest. 

5. Injury to lungs as wound, laceration, etc. 

6. Injury to heart—stab wound, rupture, 
cardiac tamponade, etc. 

7. Injury to major vessels. 

8. Injury to trachea and oesophagus. 

9. Incised wounds of abdomen, which may be 
penetrating to organs like liver, intestine, or 
kidneys. 

10. Blunt injuries to liver, kidneys, intestines, 
etc. 

The major reasons are road traffic accidents, 
fall from height, crush injuries, stab injuries, etc. 

Injuries to Skeletal System 

It includes all kinds of fractures. 

Medico-legal Importance 

The medico-legal importance of injuries to thorax, 
abdomen and skeletal system has been individually 
discussed in the concerned chapters. 


CFMT-15 (3rd Proof).p65 


107 


8/14/07, 3:54 PM 


















108 Concise Textbook of Forensic Medicine and Toxicology 


Injuries to Face and Neck may be due to stab or blunt trauma. Medico-legal 

Injuries to face include abrasions, contusions or importance of these has been individually discussed 
burns due to flame or corrosives. Injuries to neck in the previous chapter. 


CFMT-15 (3rd Proof).p65 


108 


8/14/07, 3:54 PM 


















CHAPTER 

16 

Traffic Injuries 


Roadside traffic injuries are quite common. The 
injuries depend on velocity of vehicle, position of 
victim and the site of impact. If a vehicle is running 
at a great speed, it would produce severe injuries. 

INJURIES TO DRIVER 

When frontal impact occurs, which is very 
common, the face may receive abrasions, 
contusions and lacerations, and fracture of legs 
around knee may occur. There may be impact of 
steering wheel on chest and abdomen, resulting in 
blunt trauma inside. Fracture of ribs, rupture of 
liver, and laceration of lungs and heart may be seen. 
Laceration of aorta may also be seen. Whiplash 
injury to neck may occur. Injuries to upper limbs 
may also be seen. Sometimes, impact of collision 
may be so strong that the driver may be ejected out 
of the vehicle and may land on the bonnet or on 
the road. 

INJURIES TO NON-DRIVING OCCUPANTS 

The front seat occupants may receive same type of 
injuries as the driver except that there is no hit by 
the steering wheel in front. The occupants may get 
ejected out of the vehicle. The rear seat occupants 
may get severely injured after hitting the front seat 
or other objects present in the car. 


INJURIES TO PEDESTRIANS 

The following types of injuries are seen in 
pedestrians: 

1 . Primary Impact Injuries: These injuries 
are sustained when any part of vehicle first 
strikes the victim. Usually, they are seen on 
legs when bonnet strikes the legs. When the 
impact is severe, imprint abrasion in the 
form of tyre mark or bonnet mark may be 
seen which may help in identification of the 
vehicle. 

2. Secondary Impact Injuries: These injuries 
are sustained as a result of impact between 
body parts of the victim and the vehicle for 
the second time as the victim, after being 
hit by the vehicle is thrown up on the vehicle. 

3. Secondary Injuries: These injuries are 
sustained when the victim after being 
thrown by the vehicle hits the ground. 
Sometimes, the victim may be hit by another 
vehicle also. 

4. Crush Injuries: When a victim is run over 
by the vehicle, crush injuries are produced. 
The severity of injuries depends on weight 
of the vehicle and area of crush injuries. 

In a typical case of primary impact injuries, 
the injuries are seen on legs. The first impact results 
in fracture of tibia and fibula which may be 


CFMT-16 (3rd Proof).p65 


109 


8/12/07, 9:37 AM 


















110 Concise Textbook of Forensic Medicine and Toxicology 


compound or comminuted. These are also called 
‘bumper injuries’ as bumper is the first part to hit 
the body. 

INJURIES TO TWO-WHEELER DRIVERS 

The injuries to two-wheeler drivers driving 
motorcycles and scooters are quite common as the 
vehicle either skids or hits a pedestrian or other 


vehicle. In such cases injuries to upper and lower 
limbs are also very common. Head injuries are also 
very common; they are more severe if helmet is 
not worn. Fractura in motorcyclists is often found 
to be at the base of the skull due to the severe impact 
by hitting the ground. At post-mortem examination, 
the base of the skull appears to be divided into two 
halves, each moving independently like a hinge. 
Ring fracture may also be seen. 


CFMT-16 (3rd Proof).p65 


110 


8/12/07, 9:37 AM 


















CHAPTER 

Impotence, Sterility and Artificial 
Insemination 


IMPOTENCE AND STERILITY 

Impotence is defined as physical incapability to 
sustain erection to accomplish sexual intercourse. 
In males, penile erection may be very feeble or 
absent. Even if erection is maintained for some 
time, it may not last till the sexual act is completed. 
Sterility means inability to produce children. An 
impotent person may or may not be sterile while a 
sterile person may or may not be impotent. But in 
some cases, both conditions are present. 

Examination of a Male Person for Impotence 

The court may direct a doctor to examine a person 
and report whether he is impotent or not. Such 
examinations are usually ordered in rape cases, 
unnatural sexual offences or divorce cases where 
impotence is alleged, or in cases of disputed 
paternity. The doctor should conduct complete 
physical examination. History of systemic diseases 
like hypertension, diabetes mellitus should be 
elicited. In local examination, development of 
penis, scrotum, pubic hair, etc. should be noted. If 
possible, cremasteric reflex should be elicited. A 
brief neurological examination should be done. If 
nothing wrong is found, the opinion regarding 
impotence should be given in negative format 
stating that there is nothing to suggest that this 
person is not capable of performing sexual 
intercourse. 


Causes of Impotence/Sterility in Males 

The following are the causes of impotence/sterility 
in males: 

1. Age: Impotence may be seen in very old or 
young persons. Boys are generally impotent 
till they achieve puberty, which is around 
15-16 years. Some erection may be seen 
even at the age of 13-14 years. At 15-16 
years, the development of genital organs is 
seen. The pubic hair grow. The penis and 
scrotum become adult in size. The boys who 
are at puberty may not be impotent but may 
be sterile initially as ejaculation of semen 
takes some more time. Very old persons may 
become impotent but still they can produce 
children. But in old age, ability to produce 
children also decreases. 

2. Congenital Malformations: Some 
malformations like hypospadias, epispadias 
may make a person impotent as penile 
erection may be painful and acute. Other 
congenital malformations like absence of 
penis, scrotum may make a person 
completely impotent. Impotence may also 
be seen in cases of male pseudo¬ 
hermaphrodites. 

3. Local Trauma or Diseases: A large 
inguinal hernia, hydrocele and paraphimosis 
can cause temporary impotence due to 
mechanical obstruction. Diseases like 


CFMT-17 (3rd Proof).p65 


111 


8/14/07, 3:57 PM 


















112 Concise Textbook of Forensic Medicine and Toxicology 


mumps causing orchitis, syphilis, 
tuberculosis, and cancer may lead to 
impotence/sterility. Inflammatory diseases 
of testes, epididymis, and prostrate can 
cause impotence or sterility. Varicocele can 
cause sterility. Local trauma at genitals can 
cause physical damage to penis or scrotum 
and may lead to impotence or sterility or 
both. Blows on head or spine at level of 
lumbar 4 or 5 vertebrae can cause neuronal 
damage resulting in impotence. Exposure 
to radiations like X-ray or cobalt therapy 
may cause sterility if testes are exposed to 
radiation. 

4. Systemic Diseases: Diseases like 
uncontrolled diabetes mellitus, 
hypertension, pulmonary tuberculosis, or 
any disease causing great disability may 
result in impotence. Alpha-blocker drugs 
like atenolol used in anti-hypertensive 
therapy are known to cause impotence. 
Prolonged use of alcohol, opium, 
barbiturates, Cannabis indica, tobacco, 
cocaine and dhatura may cause impotence. 

5. Psychological: Severe anxiety, depression, 
fear and guilt may cause impotence. Some 
people are born with low sexual desires. 
Some persons may have low sexual desire 
later in life when they channelise more of 
their energy in career promotion or may 
become religious. It is sometimes noted that 
a person may be impotent to one woman 
but not to others. 

While deciding case of divorce, man’s 
sexual impotence is judged only towards 
wife, not to others. Most of the 
psychological causes of impotence can be 
treated with counselling or use of drugs or 
both. 

Causes of Impotence/Sterility in the Female 

The following are the causes of impotence/sterility 

in the female: 


1. Age: Since female is a passive agent in 
sexual intercourse, she can participate in 
sexual intercourse even till old age, although 
young girls before puberty cannot 
participate as sexual organs are not 
developed. Puberty in India starts at around 
13-14 years of age. With puberty, there is 
development of genital organs like vagina, 
clitoris, labia majora and labia minora. 
Breast development also occurs. Secondary 
sexual characters develop. Initially, 
menstrual cycles are anovulatory, so a girl 
can be sterile initially although she may be 
potent. Females can bear children till 
menopause sets in which usually starts at 
45th year. After menopause, a female can 
remain sexually active but she may not be 
able to bear children, although cases have 
been reported where women have borne 
children even beyond 60 years. 

2. Congenital Malformations: Such 
malformation as absence of vagina, 
adhesions of labia, absence of uterus may 
make women completely impotent and 
sterile. Maldevelopment of female genitalia 
may be seen in intersex cases. 

3. Local Trauma or Diseases: Inflammatory 
diseases of vagina may make sexual 
intercourse painful for woman and man. 
Inflammatory diseases of uterus, ovaries or 
fallopian tubes may make a woman sterile. 
Neoplastic growths may also make a woman 
sterile. Local trauma may produce injuries 
to vagina, labia or uterus and may result in 
impotence or sterility both. 

4. Systemic Diseases: General diseases like 
hypertension, diabetes mellitus or severe 
debilitating diseases may make a woman 
less interested in sex and may make her 
functionally impotent. 

5. Psychological: Extreme hatred, fear, severe 
anxiety, fear of pregnancy, depression may 
make a woman impotent and she may refuse 
to participate in sex. Young virgin girls 
initially may have vaginismus. In this they 


CFMT-17 (3rd Proof).p65 


112 


8/14/07, 3:57 PM 


















Impotence, Sterility and Artificial Insemination 113 


develop reflex spasm of levator ani. the 
perineal and adductor muscles of thigh. This 
results in distressing vaginal contraction 
rendering penetration impossible. Such 
cases can be treated by counselling and if 
needed by introduction of special glass rods 
to overcome vaginal spasm. 

ARTIFICIAL INSEMINATION 
Definition 

When semen is deposited by artificial methods in 
vagina, cervical canal or in the uterus to bring 
pregnancy in an otherwise healthy woman, it is 
called artificial insemination. When semen of the 
husband is used it is called ‘artificial insemination 
homologous’. When semen of some other male 
(donor) is used it is called an ‘artificial insemination 
donor’ or ‘artificial insemination heterologous’. 

Indications for Artificial Insemination 
Homologous 

1. When husband is impotent but not sterile. 

2. If there is some problem in vagina of the 
female where normal sexual intercourse is 
not possible. 

Indications for Artificial Insemination Donor 

1. When husband is sterile even if potent. 

2. When there is Rh incompatibility between 
husband and wife. 

3. When husband is having mental illness or 
hereditary diseases. 

Procedure 

About 1 ml of semen is deposited above internal 
os by a syringe around 14th day of menstrual cycle 


to coincide near-date of ovulation. The semen is 
usually collected by masturbation after an 
abstinence of about one week. It is done to increase 
sperm count. The semen should be used within 2 
hours. Nowadays, with cryopreservation, semen 
can be preserved for a long time and frozen semen 
can be used when required. 

Medico-legal Significance 

In India, there are no specific laws regarding 
artificial insemination, so one should be careful 
while doing it. Here are some guidelines to be kept 
in mind: 

1. Consent: Consent of both spouses must be 
taken in writing. The whole procedure 
should be explained in detail. 

2. Confidentiality: Identity of donor or 
recipient should not be revealed to each 
other and donor should not be told about 
the result. 

3. Selection of donor: The selection of donor 
should be done carefully. He must be 
healthy, below the age of 40 years, should 
not be suffering from any hereditary or 
familial disease. He should be screened for 
HIV, Rh incompatibility and hepatitis B. 
Complete medical examination of donor 
should be done. In morphological 
appearance, it is better that he should be near 
to the recipient and her husband. He should 
have children of his own. Consent of his 
wife must be taken to avoid lawsuit later 
on. A declaration should be taken from the 
donor that he will not claim parenthood if 
the child is born. 

4. It is advisable that doctor who is conducting 
artificial insemination should not be 
involved in child birth. 

5. Semen must be obtained only through 
masturbation not by sexual intercourse. 


CFMT-17 (3rd Proof).p65 


113 


8/14/07, 3:57 PM 


















114 Concise Textbook of Forensic Medicine and Toxicology 


Legal Issues in Artificial Insemination 

The issues involved are as follows: 

1. Legality: In cases where semen of the 
husband is used for artificial insemination, 
the child is legitimate as child actually 
belongs to the husband and wife. 

2. Adultery: Since in cases of artificial 
insemination donor, there is no actual sexual 
intercourse as semen is obtained through 
masturbation and deposited by artificial 
methods, the act does not amount to 
adultery. 

3. Nullity of Marriage and Divorce : S terility 
is not a ground for divorce. So, mere 
artificial insemination is not a ground at all. 

4. Legal Suits: If a defective child having 
congenital malformation is born, the doctor 
who conducted artificial insemination 
donor, may be sued by the recipient couple. 
So, proper precautions must be taken. 

5. Future Complications: Since, the advent 
of cryopreservation, semen of the husband 
can be preserved for a very long time. 
Widow of a person can desire to be pregnant 
with frozen semen of the husband and may 
give birth to child. In such cases the child is 
called posthumous child and a lot of legal 
questions can be raised regarding 
legitimacy. 

TEST TUBE BABY OR IN VITRO 
FERTILISATION 

This is done mainly in cases where woman does 
not get pregnant by husband due to various reasons 
which are as follows: 

1. Low sperm count 

2. Blocked fallopian tube 

3. Hostile cervical mucus 

4. Unexplained infertility. 

In such cases, ova of the woman is fertilised 
by the sperm of her husband outside the body in 


laboratory conditions. The fertilised ovum is then 
implanted in the uterus of the biological mother. 
The child is born in natural manner. 

Surrogate Mother 

In some cases where a woman is not able to 
conceive due to uterine complications like fibroids, 
malignancy, septate uterus, etc., the ovum of the 
woman is taken and is fertilised by the semen of 
her husband in laboratory, and then it is implanted 
in some other woman who acts as a mother. She is 
called a ‘surrogate mother’. She is not the biological 
mother but delivers the child. She returns the child 
after birth to the biological mother. 

Medico-legal Issues in In Vitro Fertilisation 

The following are the medico-legal issues involved 
in in vitro fertilisation: 

1. Sometimes, it is observed that surrogate 
mother may refuse to hand over the child to 
the biological mother. Law position in such 
cases is not clear in India, although in many 
western countries judgements have been 
given in favour of the surrogate mother. 

2. Frozen embryos: Nowadays, in many 
countries fertilised ova are preserved for a 
long time by cryopreservation. In such 
cases, many complications can occur, e.g. 
if there is divorce between the couple and 
each seeks custody of frozen embryos. In 
one case, the couple died in accident leaving 
behind frozen embryos and one of the 
friends of the couple agreed to act as 
surrogate mother and gave birth to the child. 
Such complications can arise in future. 

3. If a defective child is born, the doctor can 
be sued for wrongful birth. 

Recent Concepts 

National guidelines for accreditation, 
supervision and regulation of assisted 
reproductive technique clinics in India: 


CFMT-17 (3rd Proof).p65 


114 


8/14/07, 3:57 PM 


















Impotence, Sterility and Artificial Insemination 115 


In 2005, ICMR/National Academy of Medical 
Sciences, New Delhi, has formulated national 
guidelines for accreditation, supervision and 
regulation of assisted reproductive technique clinics 
(ART clinics) in India and these have come into 
force. 

The salient features are as follows: 

1. Registration of ART clinics have been made 
mandatory. 

2. Minimum physical requirements for such 
clinics have been prescribed. 

3. Essential qualification for ART team has 
been laid out. It should contain 
gynaecologist, andrologist and clinical 
embryologist supported by a counsellor and 
a programme coordinator/director. 

4. ART procedures have been laid out clearly. 

5. Artificial insemination with husband’s 
semen is allowed without much formalities. 

6. Artificial insemination with donor (AID) is 
allowed. The common indications for this 
are as follows: 

(a) Husband has non-obstructive 
azoospermia. 

(b) Husband has hereditary genetic defect. 

(c) The couple has Rh incompatibility. 

(d) The women is iso-immunized, has lost 
previous pregnancies and intrauterine 
transfusion is not possible. 

(e) The husband has severe oligozoospermia 
and the couple does not want to undergo 
any of the sophisticated ART technique 
like ICSI (intracytoplasmic sperm 
injection). 

7. The indications for oocyte donation or 
embryo donation (ED) have been well 
defined. 

8. Cryopreservation of semen or freezing 
embryos to be done as per procedure. 

9. National Advisory Committee would keep 
updated new future ART technologies and 
legalize them. 


10. Possible misuse of ART (sale of embryos) 
and stem cells is banned. 

11. Guidelines for patient selection and donor 
selection have been documented. 

12. Code of practice, ethical consideration and 
legal issues have been described in detail. 

13. All information regarding clients and donors 
must be kept confidential. 

14. Requirements for a sperm donor: Following 
are the requirements for a sperm donor. 

(a) The individual must be free of HIV and 
hepatitis B&C infections, hypertension, 
diabetes, sexually transmitted diseases 
and identifiable and common genetic 
disorders like thalassaemia. 

(b) Donor must not be below 21 years or 
above 45 years of age. 

(c) Semen analysis should be done to see if 
it is normal. 

(d) The complete medical history and 
physical characteristics of donor should 
be noted. 

15. Requirement for an oocyte donor — Almost 
all of the above guidelines should be 
followed except the fact that the age of 
donor should not be less than 21 years or 
more than 45 years. 

Medico-legal Considerations 

1. ART used for married women with the 
consent of the husband does not amount to 
be adultery on part of the wife or the donor. 
AID without the consent of husband is a 
ground for divorce. 

2. Conception of wife through AIH (artificial 
insemination homologous) does not 
necessarily amount to consummation of 
marriage and decree of divorce can still be 
granted in favour of the wife on the ground 
of impotency of husband. 

3. The child conceived through AID with 
proper consents would be assumed to be a 


CFMT-17 (3rd Proof).p65 


115 


8/14/07, 3:57 PM 


















116 Concise Textbook of Forensic Medicine and Toxicology 


legitimate child of the couple who seeks 
ART and would enjoy all privileges of a 
child born to a couple through sexual 
intercourse. 

4. Children born through the use of donor 
gametes and their ‘adopted’ parents shall 


have the right to available medical or genetic 
information about the genetic parents that 
may be relevant to the child’s health. 

5. Children born through the use of donor 
gametes shall not have any right to know 
the identity of the genetic parents. 


CFMT-17 (3rd Proof).p65 


116 


8/14/07, 3:57 PM 


















CHAPTER 

18 

Virginity, Pregnancy and Delivery 


VIRGINITY 

A woman who has not participated in sexual 
intercourse is called a ‘virgin’. The signs of virginity 
are as follows: 

Genitalia 

The labia majora in a virgin woman are thick, firm, 
elastic and round and lie in contact with each other. 
They cover vulva completely. The labia minora are 
soft and small. The vagina is narrow and tight. 
Vaginal walls have rugosity. 

Triangular area lying between labia minora 
with clitoris as apex and the anterior margin of the 
hymen as base, commonly called vestibule is 
narrow. The posterior commissure and the 
fourchette are intact and crescent shaped. 

The hymen is a thin layer of mucous membrane 
situated at the orifice of vagina. It has got a small 
opening through which menstrual fluid passes. 

Types of Hymen 

1. Annular: When the opening is central, it 
may be round or elongated in character. The 
opening is semi-lunar or crescentic with the 
opening anteriorly. 

2. Fimbriated: When the free margins of 
hymen are fimbriated having many notches, 
it may resemble artificial tears. But these 
notches do not extend up to vaginal wall 
and are quite symmetrical. Tears caused by 


sexual intercourse are usually situated 
posteriorly on one side of the median line 
and extend up to the vaginal wall. 

3. Septate: When the hymen is divided by a 
bridge of tissue into two equal or unequal 
compartments, it is called a septate hymen. 

4. Cribriform: When there are many minute 
openings in hymen, it is called cribriform. 

5. Imperforate: When there is no opening in 
hymen it is called imperforate hymen. If 
such is the case, then surgical intervention 
is needed to make a small hole so that 
menstrual fluid can pass (Fig. 18.1). 

In small children, the hymen is more deep as 
compared to young girls. So in minor sexual attempt 
the hymen in small children escapes unhurt. Hymen 
usually ruptures with first sexual act but it may still 
be seen in some cases even with repeated sexual 
intercourse if it is elastic. Besides sexual 
intercourse, hymen can also accidentally rupture 
while cycling or by a fall on projected surface. 
Hymen may also rupture if a girl is involved in 
masturbation and she inserts some foreign body or 
when a foreign body like an instrument or two 
fingers are introduced while conducting medical 
examination. So, in cases of young virgin girls, 
vaginal examination is not done routinely. If there 
is a need, vaginal examination is done by 
introduction of only one finger. In some diseases 
like diphtheria hymen may be destroyed due to 
ulceration. 


CFMT-18 (3rd Proof).p65 


117 


8/16/07, 4:48 PM 


















118 Concise Textbook of Forensic Medicine and Toxicology 



Annular Semilunar Fimbriated 



Imperforate Cribriform Septate 



Elastic After first coitus Carunculae myrtiformes 


Fig. 18.1 Types of hymen. 


CFMT-18 (3rd Proof).p65 


118 


8/16/07, 4:48 PM 


























Virginity, Pregnancy and Delivery 119 


Breasts 

Breasts in virgin girls are round, firm, hemispherical 
with a small undeveloped nipples. The areola 
around the nipple is usually pink. With frequent 
handling of breasts during sexual intercourse they 
become loose and saggy. 

Medico-legal Aspects of Virginity 

The question about virginity of a woman becomes 
significant in marriage suits like divorce or nullity 
of marriage. A married woman may approach the 
court of law stating that her husband is impotent and 
she is still a virgin. In these cases, the court may ask 
a doctor to verify that the woman is a virgin or not. 

True Virgin 

A woman whose hymen is intact and its orifice does 
not allow penetration of more than one finger can 
be called a true virgin. 


intact even with repeated sexual intercourse as it 
can easily accommodate an object of the size of 
erect penis. Cases have been reported where hymen 
was ruptured only during child birth. In such cases 
while examining, one should look for other signs 
of virginity to give opinion. Examination of labia 
majora, labia minora and clitoris should be done 
carefully to ascertain whether they are consistent 
with the signs of virginity or not. Only after taking 
into consideration all this, opinion about virginity 
should be given (Table 18.1). 

PREGNANCY 

The signs of pregnancy in a living woman are 
described as follows: 

1. Presumptive signs 

2. Probable signs 

3. Positive signs 


False Virgin 

In some cases, hymen is elastic and can easily admit 
more than one finger. In such cases, hymen remains 


Presumptive Signs 

The presence of following signs may raise a 
presumption that the woman is pregnant: 


Table 18.1 Differences between true virgin and false virgin 



Characteristics 

True virgin 

False virgin/deflorated women 

1 . 

Breasts: Shape 

Hemispherical and firm 

May be pendulous with repeated handling 


Areolae 

Pink areolae 

Pigmented and Montgomery tubercles may be 
there if pregnant 


Nipples 

Pink and small 

Pigmented and enlarged if pregnant 

2. 

Labia majora 

Firm and lie in apposition 

Separated and flabby 

3. 

Labia minora 

Soft and sensitive, pink 

Brownish, separate and elongated 

4. 

Clitoris Small 

May be enlarged 


5. 

Fourchette and posterior 
commissure 

Intact 

Tom 

6. 

Vestibule 

Narrow 

Wide 

7. 

Vagina 

Narrow, rugae present, 
walls firm 

Enlarged and roomy, rugae may be absent 

8. 

Hymen 

Intact. Admits only one finger, 
insertion painful, membranous 

Loose or folded or thick hymen may be see 
Easily admits two fingers. Hymen may be 
fleshy 


CFMT-18 (3rd Proof).p65 


119 


8/16/07, 4:48 PM 





















120 Concise Textbook of Forensic Medicine and Toxicology 


1. Cessation of Menstruation: The commonest 
reason for cessation of menstruation in a 
young, adult woman who is not menopausal 
is pregnancy. But cessation of menses can 
occur in other conditions like anaemia, 
emotional stress, endocrine disorders and 
systemic diseases. 

2. Changes in Breasts: Initially the breasts 
become tender and full in size and in 3-4 
weeks they start increasing in size. The 
nipple becomes dark, prominent, harder, 
firmer and easily erectable. The areolae 
surrounding the nipple become darker and 
wider. Small glandular tubercles called 
Montgomery’s tubercles appear in this 
area due to hypertrophy of sebaceous 
glands. At around 12 weeks of pregnancy, a 
small colostrum can be squeezed out of 
breasts on pressure. At around 24 weeks, 
striae may be seen due to stretching of skin. 
Sometimes all these changes can be seen in 
some ovarian diseases and are not diagnostic 
of pregnancy. 

3 . Changes in Vagina: The mucous membrane 
of vagina becomes blue from normal pinkish 
due to venous congestion around 4th week 
of pregnancy. This is called as Chadwick’s 
sign or Jacquemier’s sign. But this blue 
discolouration of vaginal wall can be seen 
in other conditions also, where there is 
pelvic congestion. Pulsation of vaginal 
arteries can also be felt. 

4. Pigmentation of Skin: There is a 
generalised increased pigmentation of skin 
especially observed on abdomen, axillae 
and pubic region. Dark bands called linea 
nigra are observed. 

5. Morning Sickness: Early morning nausea 
or vomiting is seen in first three months of 
pregnancy. However, it is caused in so many 
other conditions that it is not reliable at all. 

6. Quickening: When the foetal movements 
are felt by the mother, she is said to be “quick 
with the child.” It occurs around 20 weeks. 
Sometimes a woman who is very eager to 


became pregnant may feel such movements 
which is called ‘pseudocyesis’ or ‘phantom 
pregnancy’ or ‘spurious pregnancy’. Even 
flatulence may cause such movements. 

7. Sympathetic Changes: Increased 
salivation, pica or perverted food taste, 
irritable temper and easy fatigue are 
commonly seen. 

8. Frequency of Micturition: Due to pressure 
of foetus on urinary bladder there is 
increased frequency of urination. 

Probable Signs 

The following are probable signs of pregnancy: 

1. Enlargement of Abdomen: With the 

growth of uterus, the abdomen starts 
enlarging. Uterus remains in the pelvic 
cavity till 12 weeks. After that there is 
constant growth. At 24 weeks, it reaches the 
level of umbilicus. At 36 weeks it reaches 
the level of xiphisternum or epigastrium. At 
40 weeks, as the uterus widens, the fundal 
height decreases and reaches at the level of 
32 weeks uterine size. The enlargement of 
abdomen can also be seen in cases of 
obesity, ascites, ovarian or uterine tumours 
(Fig. 18.2). 

2. Hegar’s Sign: The softening and 
compressibility of lower segment of uterus 
can be felt at 3-10 weeks of gestation. It is 
called ‘Hegar’s sign’. 

3 . Changes in Cervix: Within first few months 
of pregnancy, the cervix which is normally 
as hard as tip of nose becomes as soft as lips. 
Its softness can be felt by vaginal examination 
at about 16 weeks. It is also known as 
‘GoodelTs sign’. With advancement of 
pregnancy, there is shortening in the size of 
cervix and its orifice becomes circular from 
transverse and can admit tip of the finger. 

4. Braxton Hicks Sign: Intermittent uterine 
contractions, known as Braxton Hick’s 
sign can be observed by placing a hand on 


CFMT-18 (3rd Proof).p65 


120 


8/16/07, 4:48 PM 


















Virginity, Pregnancy and Delivery 121 



Fig. 18.2 Fundal heights during various durations 
of pregnancy. 

abdomen from 6th week onwards. Each 
contraction lasts for about 1-5 minutes and 
relaxation for about 5-20 minutes. 

5. Ballottement: It can be done internally 
(through vagina) or externally through 
abdomen. It is a sensation felt when foetus 
moves in liquor amnii. It is commonly seen 
at 16-20 weeks. 

6. Palpation of Foetus: The external features 
of foetus can be felt during the second half 
of pregnancy. 

7. Uterine Souffle: Soft blowing murmur is 
heard by auscultation around 16th week due 
to passage of blood through dilated arteries 
on either side of the uterus just above the 
Poupart’s ligament. 

8. Endocrine Tests: The presence of HCG 
(human chorionic gonadotrophin) in 
maternal plasma and urine can be detected. 
A lot of endocrine tests can be done on 
animals to detect HCG. The following are 
some of the tests: 

(a) Aschheim-Zondek test: It is done on 
sexually immature mice. They are 
inoculated with urine of suspected 
pregnancy. They are sacrificed after 5 days. 


Presence of HCG can be confirmed by 
detecting presence of corpus luteum and 
haemorrhage into follicles of enlarged 
ovaries. 

(b) Friedman test: It is done on female rabbit. 
Morning urine is injected in an ear vein. 
After 2 days, corpus luteum and corpora 
haemorrhagia can be detected in ovaries. 

(c) Hogben or Xenopus test: It is done on 
female toad. The morning urine is injected 
and in 24 hours, extrusion of eggs can be 
seen through cloaca. 

(d) Galli Mainini test: In this, male toad is 
taken. Morning urine is injected and in 2-5 
hours, the extrusion of sperms can be seen. 
These endocrine tests are not reliable. They 
are now replaced by immunological tests. 

(e) Immunological tests: 

(i) Hemagglutination inhibition test: Based 
on antigen-antibody reaction, absence of 
agglutination is seen due to presence of 
HCG in red blood cells. 

(ii) Latex agglutination test: In this, latex 
particles are used instead of red blood 
cells. Inhibition of agglutination shows 
HCG. 

(iii) Radioimmunoassay: In this, even very 
small quantity of HCG can be detected. 
Nowadays, a pregnancy kit is available 
in the market by which even a layman 
can do a pregnancy test by simply 
adding a few drops of early morning 
urine onto the test plate. 

Positive Signs 

These are confirmatory signs of pregnancy: 

1. Foetal Heart Sound: It can be heard around 
18-20 weeks of gestation. It is between 120 
and 160 per minute. 

2. Foetal Movement: It can be felt and seen 
through 16-20 weeks. Foetal parts can also 
be palpated. 


CFMT-18 (3rd Proof).p65 


121 


8/16/07, 4:48 PM 








































122 Concise Textbook of Forensic Medicine and Toxicology 


3. X-ray Examination: As the centres of 
ossification start appearing around 16 
weeks, X-ray can reveal foetal skeleton. 
X-ray examination should not be routinely 
done as it is injurious to the foetus. 

4. Sonography: It is safest and the best. Here, 
you can detect foetus as early as 6 weeks. It 
is nowadays commonly done to detect 
defects in development of foetus. 

Death of Foetus in Utero 

Initially, non-growth of uterus, loss of foetal 
movement and heart sound may point towards death 
in uterus. Later on, radiological examination due 
to liquefaction of brain, overlapping of skull bones 
can be seen, it is called Spalding’s sign. Gas may 
be demonstrated in heart and great vessels can be 
seen with collapse of spinal column. 

Signs of Pregnancy in the Dead 

Pregnancy in a dead woman can be determined in 
following ways: 

1 . Presence of Foetus or Ovum: The presence 
of foetus, pregnant ovum or signs of 
pregnancy like placenta may be seen on 
post-mortem examination. 

2. Uterine Changes: The weight of uterus 
increases up to 1 kg from 30 gm. The length 
increases from about 4 cm to 30 cm, and 
width from 4 cm to 23 cm. The marks of 
attachment of placenta may be seen. 

3. Corpus Luteum: If a woman becomes 
pregnant, corpus luteum may start growing 
and may be observed in ovary easily. The 
microscopic changes can be observed on 
histological examination. 

Medico-legal Significance of Pregnancy 

1 . Civil Cases: A woman may bring a child in 
the court of law or may say that she is 


pregnant after her husband’s death to claim 
property. A woman may bring lawsuit 
against a man that she is pregnant and he is 
refusing to marry her after making promises. 

2. Criminal Cases: A woman may say that 
she is raped by a person and is pregnant. 
The question of pregnancy may arise in 
cases of infanticide. A woman who is 
sentenced to death may say that she is quick 
with child and ask for postponement of 
death penalty. 

Delivery 

The question whether a woman has delivered or 
not arises in cases of abortion, infanticide, 
concealment of birth, feigned delivery and disputes 
regarding virginity. 

Signs of Recent Delivery in the Living 

If a woman has delivered a full term baby, following 
features are seen: 

1. General Physical State: Within 72-96 
hours of delivery, the woman remains quite 
weak in disposition. The intermittent 
contractions of uterus are present and are 
painful. They are called ‘after pains’. 
Woman generally becomes physically all 
right by 6-7 days. 

2. Breasts: They are enlarged, firm and exude 
colostrum initially, and later milk. The nipples 
are enlarged and areola dark coloured. 

3. Abdomen: The tone of muscles is weak. 
Linea alba may be seen which are initially 
pink and later becomes white. 

4. Uterus: Immediately after delivery, uterus 
decreases in size and may be seen at the 
umbilicus level. It decreases in size and in 
6 weeks it becomes a pelvic organ. 

5. Vagina and Cervix: The vagina is very 
tender and may show tears. Labia majora 
and labia minora are swollen and tender. The 
cervix is soft and patulous. The internal os 


CFMT-18 (3rd Proof).p65 


122 


8/16/07, 4:48 PM 



















Virginity, Pregnancy and Delivery 123 


starts closing in 24 hours. Later on external 
os also closes in 2 weeks. 

6. Lochia: The discharge from uterus and 
vagina after delivery is called lochia. 
Initially it is red in colour till 4—5 days and 
is called 'lochia rubra’. Initially it consists 
of pure blood and clots. Later in 4-5 days, 
it becomes serous and pale in colour and is 
called ‘lochia serosa’. After 9-10 days, it 
becomes white in colour and is called 
‘lochia alba’. It disappears in 2 weeks. 

Signs of Recent Delivery in Dead 

Above signs can be seen in a dead body also. On 
post-mortem examination, uterus would be found 
bulky and on opening up may show clot or signs 
of placenta. Histopathological examination would 
be of great help. The ovaries and fallopian tubes 
may be congested. Corpus luteum can be seen in 
one ovary. 


Signs of Remote Delivery in the Living 

1. Abdomen: The muscles may be relaxed and 
abdomen may feel flabby. Linea alba, the 
mark of distention of abdomen during 
pregnancy may be seen. 

2. Breasts: They become soft and pendulous. 
The nipples are enlarged with dark areolae. 

3. Vagina: The vagina is roomy and its rugae 
may be absent. The labia are more or less 
separated from each other. Healed vaginal 
tears may be seen. The hymen would be 
absent and cervix os is wider. 

Signs of Remote Delivery in the Dead 

In multiparous woman, the uterus would be larger, 
and heavy as compared to nulliparous woman. The 
changes mentioned above may be seen. If much 
time has passed, it may not be able to give exact 
period of delivery. 


CFMT-18 (3rd Proof).p65 


123 


8/16/07, 4:48 PM 


















CHAPTER 

19 

Sexual Offences 


Sexual assault is an act of sexual intimacy done 
without the consent of the victim, or where consent 
has been obtained by means of threat, fear or fraud. 
In our country, sexual assault is a serious offence. 

Sexual offences may be described as natural 
sexual offences like rape, or unnatural sexual 
offences like sodomy, buccal coitus, tribadism, 
bestiality and certain sexual deviations. 

NATURAL SEXUAL OFFENCES 

Rape 

Definition 

Rape in India is defined (under Section 375 of the 

I.P.C.) as an unlawful sexual intercourse by a man, 

1. With his own wife under the age of 15 years, 
or 

2. With any other woman under the age of 16 
years with or without her consent, or 

3. With any other woman above the age of 16 
years, against her will, without her consent, or 

4. With her consent—when her consent has 
been obtained by putting her or any person 
in whom she is interested in fear of death or 
hurt, or 

5. With her consent—when the man knows 
that he is not her husband and the consent 
is given because she believes that he is 
another man to whom she is or believes 
herself to be lawfully married, or 


6. With her consent—when at the time of 
giving such consent, by reason of 
unsoundness of mind, intoxication or the 
administration of any stupefying or 
unwholesome substance, she is unable to 
understand the nature and consequence of 
what she has given consent to. 

Explanation 

Penetration is sufficient to constitute the sexual 
intercourse necessary to the offence. 

Punishment for Rape 

Section 376 of the I.P.C imposes a minimum term 
of 7 years imprisonment and a maximum of life 
imprisonment for the offence of rape. However, a 
judge at his discretion can award lesser sentence. 

Custodial Rape 

It has been sometimes observed that women are 
sexually abused in jails, remand homes, hospitals 
or where the woman is in custody and she is not in 
a position to render sufficient opposition to the act. 
In such cases, provisions of custodial rape are 
attracted under Section 376C, 376D of the I.P.C. 

Section 376-D I.P.C 

Whoever, being in management of a hospital, or 
being one of the staff of a hospital takes advantage 
of his position, and has sexual intercourse with a 


CFMT-19 (3rd Proof).p65 


124 


8/16/07, 4:49 PM 



















Sexual Offences 125 


woman in that hospital, such sexual intercourse not 
amounting to the offence of rape, shall be punished 
with imprisonment for a term extending up to 5 
years and shall also be liable to fine. 

So, to constitute the offence of rape it is not 
necessary that there should be complete penetration 
of penis. Partial penetration within labia majora, 
or even an attempt at penetration is quite sufficient 
for the purpose of law. So, it may be possible in a 
rape case, that there is absence of injuries or seminal 
stains. Ideally, doctors should refrain from using 
the word “rape” as it is a legal entity and not a 
medical condition. The doctor should only mention 
facts and condition of the victim and state if there 
is any evidence of sexual activity or not. 

In cases where rape cannot be proved, it may 
be tried under less serious charge of indecent assault 
on a female committed with intent or knowledge 
to outrage her modesty. It is punishable under 
Section 354 of the I.P.C. by a term, which may 
extend up to 2 years, or a fine, or both. A woman 
may be accused of an indecent assault on a man 
but not rape. 

Consent 

According to the law in India, a woman of 16 years 
and above is capable of giving consent to the act of 
sexual intercourse. But the consent must be 
conscious, free, voluntary and given when she is 
mentally fit. 

In certain sections of custodial rape [under 
clause (a) to (g) of subsection (2)] of Section 376 
of the I.P.C. where sexual intercourse is proved and 
the question arises whether it was without the 
consent of the woman alleged to have been raped 
and she states in her evidence before court that she 
did not consent (Section 114A, Indian Evidence 
Act). Thus, the onus of proving consent shifts to 
the accused from victim in such limited cases. 

Prevalence of Rape 

According to National Crime Records Bureau 
Report (1998), there were 15,033 rape cases 
reported in India. Madhya Pradesh reported the 


highest incidence accounting for 22.3 per cent of 
total cases. Among the cities, Delhi and Mumbai 
recorded more crimes numbering 365 and 118, 
respectively. In rates, Mizoram [9.3] led the table 
followed by Madhya Pradesh [4.3], Dadra and 
Nager Haveli [3.9] and Delhi [3.4]. 

Victims of rape were maximum in the age 
group of 16-30 years accounting for 8,414 out of 
15,033 reported cases. 

Age 

No age is safe for rape. Children are easily abused 
as they can offer less resistance. Small infants even 
at the age of 4-6 months have also been abused. 
Even older women are not safe from rape. For 
committing rape, the law of India does not presume 
any limit under which a boy can be considered 
physically incapable of committing rape. In such 
cases, the development of child along with 
development of sexual organs has to be taken into 
consideration while deciding if he is capable of 
performing rape or not. 

Socio-economic Status 

Incidences of rape is reported more from lower 
socio-economic strata, as they tend to live in unsafe 
and crowded areas. 

Examination of the Victim 

The examination of victim should be done carefully 
as per provisions of law as they are different from 
one state to another in India. As per the recent 
judgement of Punjab and Haryana High Court, it 
is mandatory to get the rape victim examined only 
by a female doctor. In Delhi, only a gynaecologist 
does the medical examination of a rape victims. 
The examination of a rape victim should be under 
the supervision of a female medical practitioner. 

Consent 

The consent to examine a rape victim should be 
taken before commencement of examination. It 
should be in writing. As per the provisions of law, 


CFMT-19 (3rd Proof).p65 


125 


8/16/07, 4:49 PM 


















126 Concise Textbook of Forensic Medicine and Toxicology 


police or court has no power to compel a woman 
to submit private parts for examination to a medical 
practitioner, male or female. 

Examination of the Victim 

After taking consent, the medical examination 
should be started in presence of a female attendant 
or witness if a male doctor examines the patient. 
No attempt should be made to undress the woman. 
She should be politely asked to remove clothes. 
The exact time of examination, name of the person 
who brought the victim, a short factual summary 
of incidence should be recorded in medico-legal 
report in the register, which has been approved by 
the state administration. 

Two marks of identification of the victim 
should also be noted. A short description of the 
place of occurrence of the event, details of the act, 
relative position of parties, whether ejaculation 
occurred or not, pain during the act, loss of 
consciousness during the act or efforts to resist 
should be recorded. The general behaviour and 
mental state of the victim should be noted. The 
detailed examination should begin in the following 
order: 

1. Clothes: If clothes are same as ones worn 
by her at the time of sexual assault, they 
should be carefully examined for the 
presence of blood or seminal stain or any 
other discharge. The clothes especially 
undergarments should be preserved for 
examination by Forensic Science 
Laboratory. 

2. Injuries: The physical examination of the 
body especially forearms, wrist, face, 
breasts, chest, inner aspects of thighs, and 
back should be done to look for scratches, 
abrasions or bruises caused as a result of 
struggle/compression. Teeth marks if any 
may be observed on breasts, nipples, lips, 
or cheeks. Swabs from teeth bite should be 
taken for the presence of saliva. 

3. Genitals: The examination should be 
preferably done in lithotomy position. The 


pubic hair should be examined first, if they 
are found to be matted, they should be cut 
off with a pair of scissors to look for 
spermatozoa. They should be preserved in 
a dry bottle for examination at Forensic 
Science Laboratory. Dried seminal stains on 
external genitals/thighs can be scrapped 
carefully, or moistened with normal saline 
and slides may be made for microscopic 
examination. If bloodstains are present, they 
should also be preserved in a similar manner. 
Bruise or laceration, if any, on external 
genitalia may be carefully noted. The 
examination of hymen should be carefully 
done now. In a case of rape, hymen may 
have fresh radiate tears (more in posterior 
half), the edges of which may be red, 
swollen or painful if the examination of the 
victim is done within 24 hours. These tears 
heal within 5 or 6 days, and look like small 
tags of tissue after 10 days. Frequent sexual 
intercourse/delivery destroys hymen 
completely. There may be cases where 
hymen may be found to be intact and not 
lacerated. In such cases, the distensibility 
of hymen can be recorded. The fourchette 
and posterior commissure are not usually 
injured in cases of sexual assault. The degree 
of injury is dependent on the force used. In 
small children, the hymen usually escapes 
injury, as it is deep seated but becomes red 
and inflamed. 

The vaginal secretions from the 
posterior fornix should be taken either by 
introducing a plain sterile cotton swab or 
by introducing 1 ml pipette and sucking the 
contents. The contents should be 
immediately transferred to a microscopic 
slide in the form of a thin film, and should 
be fixed. The slide can be viewed for 
spermatozoa (Table 19.1). In married 
women, spermatozoa may be present 
because of previous sexual intercourse. The 
spermatozoa can be seen up to 1-7 days in 


126 


8/16/07, 4:49 PM 


CFMT-19 (3rd Proof).p65 


















Sexual Offences 127 


Table 19.1 Persistence of spermatozoa after sexual intercourse 

Sites 

Maximum length of time after intercourse 

1. Endocervical swabs 

144 hours 

2. Internal vaginal swabs 

120 hours 

3. Rectal swabs 

65 hours 

4. Anal swabs 

46 hours 

5. Lips of mouth 

9 hours 

6. Oral swab 

6 hours 


vagina after the last sexual intercourse. Even 
if spermatozoa are not present, the 
estimation of acid phosphatase level can be 
done in fluid obtained from posterior fornix 
to detect presence of seminal fluid. 

Sexually Transmitted Disease 

A woman can get venereal disease as a result of 
sexual assault, if the person who committed sexual 
assault was suffering from such a disease. A 
discharge may be observed in cases of gonorrhoea. 
A thin film from the discharge may be made, fixed 
and stained with Gram’s stain to look for gonococci 
under the microscope. The incubation period of 
gonorrhoea is about 2-8 days, therefore in case of 
suspicion, another smear may be taken after a few 
days to confirm,. If syphilitic sores are seen or 
suspected, serum for dark ground examination for 
Treponema pallidum and blood for serological 
examination should be collected. The incubation 
period of syphilis varies from 9-90 days, so samples 
at a later date may be taken for confirmation. The 
sores on genitalia may be due to chancroid, which 
can also be confirmed by making smears to 
demonstrate Ducrey’s bacillus, which is a Gram¬ 
negative streptobacillus with rounded ends. The 
other common infections that are transmitted, are 
chlamydial vaginitis and viral STD like herpes. 

The most important sexually transmitted 
disease is AIDS, which can be transmitted by 
sexual assault. The chances that a victim may 
get HIV infection in a single encounter are varied 
(3-5 per cent). 


If it is suspected, relevant tests like ELISA or 
western blot may be done at repeated intervals to 
confirm. If sodomy has been attempted or 
performed, then anal swabs from around the anus 
and anal canal may be collected and looked for 
spermatozoa/seminal fluid. 

Examination of the Accused 

In India, the examination of the accused is done on 
a written request of the police. The person is 
brought, under the custody of police, to a medical 
officer for examination. As per the law, whenever 
a person is arrested for committing sexual assault, 
a doctor should medically examine him as early as 
possible. In most states in India, the examination 
of the accused is conducted either by medical 
officers working in emergency services or a 
dermatologist and venereologist is called upon for 
examination. In some centres where forensic 
experts are available, such cases are referred to 
them. The examination of the accused should be 
recorded in medico-legal register duly authorised 
by the state government. The police constable who 
has brought him should identify the accused. This 
should be recorded in the report. The consent of 
the accused is not necessary for examination as per 
the provisions of the law of India. In fact, a 
reasonable amount of force can also be applied to 
collect evidence from this person. The marks of 
identification should be noted and left thumb 
impression of the accused may be taken on medico¬ 
legal report itself. The medical officer should record 
preliminary data and then proceed for complete 


CFMT-19 (3rd Proof).p65 


127 


8/16/07, 4:49 PM 





















128 Concise Textbook of Forensic Medicine and Toxicology 


examination. The examination of clothes should be 
done to detect semen/bloodstain or tears. 
Undergarments should be especially looked for stains 
and should be preserved for examination by Forensic 
Science Laboratory. A complete physical examination 
involving all systems like cardiovascular, alimentary, 
respiratory and nervous should follow. 

The complete body, especially inner aspects 
of thighs should be examined for mud, blood or 
seminal stains. The genitalia should be examined. 
Pubic hair, if matted, should be cut and preserved. 
The penis should be examined for injury or some 
stain, circumcision, presence of smegma or 
discharge. The cremasteric reflex may be elicited 
to rule out neuronal loss. If it is suspected that a 
person is suffering from STD, relevant evidence 
may be collected. 

After the examination is over, the doctor has 
to give opinion on two accounts: 

1. Whether the person is capable of performing 
sexual intercourse or not? 

2. Whether there is an evidence of recent 
sexual intercourse? 

The capability to perform sexual intercourse 
depends on erection of the penis. It is naturally 
assumed that all normal males who have well 
developed sexual organs are capable of erection, 
thus can perform sexual intercourse. So, the opinion 
about capability to perform sexual intercourse is 
given in a double negative form like “there is 
nothing to suggest that this person is not capable 
of performing sexual intercourse.” 

If it is suspected that the person may have some 
erectile dysfunction, he should be examined for 
chronic diseases like diabetes, hypertension, 
chronic alcoholism, neuropathies, or some psychic 
reasons. The opinion about recent sexual activity 
can be given if some stain/injury/redness is seen 
on the penis/scrotum. Previously, it was thought 
that absence of smegma could indicate recent sexual 
activity. Now it is not relied upon, as smegma 
collection depends on personal hygiene and 
circumcision. 


Samples may be collected of vaginal epithelial 
cells, which adhere to penis during sexual 
intercourse, by taking a wet swab around penis and 
making microscopic slides. These vaginal cells are 
rich in glycogen and stain readily with iodine and 
can easily be inspected microscopically. 

Previously, it was common to preserve semen 
in accused for which accused used to be asked to 
provide sample by masturbation. In non- 
cooperative accused, it was obtained by doing 
prostatic massage. Now, this is not done. Sample 
of blood obtained from finger is preserved on a 
gauze piece, and is dried and then sealed for 
examination by Forensic Science Laboratory. 

Incest 

Incest is defined as sexual intercourse between man 
and woman who are related by blood or by 
marriage, i.e. within forbidden degrees of 
relationship like a daughter, granddaughter, sister, 
stepsister, niece, aunt or mother. In India, incest 
per se is not a crime unless it attracts provisions of 
rape. However, in many western countries, incest 
is recorded as a crime and is punishable. 

UNNATURAL SEXUAL OFFENCES 

Section 377 of the I.P.C. defines sexual offences 
relating to “carnal intercourse against the order of 
nature with any man, woman or animal”. 
Penetration is sufficient to prove the offence. The 
unnatural sexual offences are punishable with 
imprisonment for life or with a term of 10 years 
and also with fine. 

Incidence 

In India, unnatural sexual offences as mentioned 
above are quite less in percentage as compared to 
western countries. The sodomy is frequent with 
small children working in tea stalls, motor 
workshops or offices. The sodomy has also been 
reported in prisoners or in armed forces, especially 
those posted in the hilly areas or remote areas. 


CFMT-19 (3rd Proof).p65 


128 


8/16/07, 4:49 PM 


















Sexual Offences 129 


Classification 

These offences are classified as: 

1. Sodomy: It is also called ‘buggery’ and is 
defined as anal intercourse between man and man 
or between man and woman. If the passive agent is 
ayoung child, it is called ‘pedestry’. Recent 
Supreme Court Judgement has decriminalised the 
offence of sodomy between two consenting adults. 
Now, sodomy with consent is not an offence is 
India. 

2. Buccal coitus: It is also called ‘sin of Gomorrah’ 
when genitalia are stimulated by mouth or penis is 
introduced in mouth. Sudden deaths have been 
reported by impaction of penis into lower part of 
pharynx or aspiration of semen ejaculate. 

3. Bestiality: It is defined as when a lower animal 
is used for sexual gratification. The common 
animals, which are subjected to this cruelty are 
dogs, sheep, cats or sometimes cows or buffaloes. 
Usually, penis is inserted into vagina or rectum of 
the animal. Cases have been reported when animals, 
especially dogs have been stimulated to perform 
sexual intercourse by inserting their penises into 
vagina of woman. Since these offences are 
punishable under law, they may be brought for 
medical examination to the doctor. 

Examination of the Victim of the Passive 
Agent 

Usually, the police brings a victim or a passive agent 
of sodomy for medical examination to the doctor. 
The consent of the victim or passive agent must be 
taken. The examination should preferably be done 
in knee elbow position. Abrasion, contusion or 
laceration may be seen around anal sphincter and 
person may complain of severe pain. These injuries 
are more important if the victim is a small boy or 
girl as compared to the accused person and a great 
force has been used to penetrate. Blood or semen 
stains may be present around anus and they should 


be lifted as described earlier. Swabs from inside 
and around anus must be taken and examined 
microscopically. In a person who is habituated to 
sodomy, following features may be present: 

1. Shaved of anal hair. 

2. A funnel-shaped depression of buttocks 
toward anus. 

3. Complete relaxation of anal sphincter when 
lateral traction is applied on both buttocks. 

4. Anus dilated and patulous, with 
disappearance of radial folds. Prolapse of 
rectal mucosa may be seen. 

5. Old lacerations around anus. 

6. Complete absence of injuries. 

7. Presence of STD in form of discharge, 
chancre or wart. 

Examination of the Accused 

The examination of an accused is quite helpful if 
done within hours of the act, as the signs start 
decreasing with time. The examination of the 
accused must be done on written request of the 
police. Consent is not required. The marks of 
identification must be noted. The complete physical 
examination, as in the case of accused of rape, must 
be done. There may be abrasion on the prepuce, 
glans penis or frenulum. Stains of faecal material 
may be seen on penis. The swabs must be taken 
from penis and the area around to look for faecal 
material. The blood/semen stains may also be 
present and should be lifted as described earlier. 
There may be marks of struggle on the body. If the 
person is suspected/suffering from STD, the victim 
should also be examined for the same. 

Bestiality is observed in villages in young 
shepherds who take animals for grazing and remain 
with them for almost the whole day. 

LESBIANISM 

This refers to female homosexuality which is 
practised between two females and mostly consists 
in friction of external genital organs by mutual body 


CFMT-19 (3rd Proof).p65 


129 


8/16/07, 4:49 PM 















130 Concise Textbook of Forensic Medicine and Toxicology 


contact for sexual gratification. In some cases, the 
clitoris of the woman may be found to be enlarged. 
In some cases, artificial object may be used for 
stimulation. Lesbianism is not punishable as it is 
not a crime under Section 377 of the I.P.C. It is 
usually found in females who are living together, 
e.g. in hostels or asylums. 

SEXUAL DEVIATIONS 

The common sexual deviations are described as 
follows: 

1. Sadism: This is a sexual perversion where 
infliction of pain, torture and humiliation 
to partner act as sexual stimulants. It may 
be seen in both the sexes but is common in 
males. Male may inflict injuries by beating 
with hands or sticks, or sometimes sexual 
organs may be targeted, foreign bodies may 
be inserted in vagina and breast may be 
contused or sometimes, the sadist may get 
so excited, that he may murder the victim 
(lust murder) or he may eat her body 
(necrophagia) after raping her corpse 
(necrophilia). 

2. Masochism: It is just opposite of sadism 
where gratification is obtained by getting 
beaten, tormented or humiliated by the sexual 
partner. It is common in males but occurs in 
females also. The females may invite males 
to inflict pain on her or abuse her. 

3. Fetishism: This perversion is seen in males 
only. In this, male gets sexual gratification 
just by seeing some part of the woman or 
her article like undergarment, shoes, clothes, 
etc. 

4. Transvestism: It is the desire to wear the 
clothes of the opposite sex. It is quite 
common in homosexuals. Some 
transvestites may seek medical treatment to 
change their gender. 

5. Exhibitionism: It is a deviation in which 
exhibitionist gets pleasure by showing his 
genitals to women, girls, or small children. 


He may also make some lewd gesture. It is 
a punishable offence under Section 294 of 
the I.P.C. 

6. Scoptophilia: It is deriving sexual pleasure 
in anticipation of exposure of one’s genitalia 
or observing genitalia of another with 
orgasm brought by masturbation during or 
after the event. Some people get excitement 
by listening to or making obscene phone 
calls. 

7. Voyeurism (Peeping tom): It refers to 
repetitive seeking for situations where 
person of the opposite sex is undressing, 
taking bath or having sex. It is also like 
watching porn movies. The males who are 
involved in this are often called peeping 
toms. 

8. Paedophilia: It is defined as preferential 
sexual activity with children. It may be 
limited to watching them nude or showing 
genitalia to them or touching young ones to 
their nubile sex organs. If sexual intercourse 
is done, it comes into the category of rape 
or sodomy as the case may be. Many 
celebrities have, in the recent past, been 
accused of paedophilia. Some perverts enjoy 
watching porn movies involving children. 

9. Necrophilia: It is a perversion when a 
person attains sexual gratification by 
watching dead nude body or doing sex with 
a dead body. Some people are so pervert 
that they eat some parts of the dead body 
too. It is called as ‘necrophagia’. This is a 
punishable offence where term may extend 
up to one year or a fine is charged or both 
are implemented. 

10. Troilism: In this, a person gets sexual 
gratification by watching his own wife 
performing sexual intercourse with some 
other man. 

11. Nymphomania: It is often described as 
excessive sexual desire in woman where she 
enjoys having multiple sex partners or 
desires excessive sexual activity. 


CFMT-19 (3rd Proof).p65 


130 


8/16/07, 4:49 PM 


















Sexual Offences 131 


12. Satyriasis: It is an excessive sexual desire 
in males who may seek multiple sex partners 
or need sex more frequently as compared 
to normal men. Such men often visit 
brothels to seek sexual gratification, or have 
multiple sex partners. 

13. Frotteurism: It is a sexual deviation in 
which the person gets pleasure by rubbing 
with bodies of opposite sex like in crowded 
bus, train or fairs. They may try to rub their 
genitalia against bodies of opposite sex in 
such situations. It is punishable in India. 

14. Undinism: This is a sexual deviation where 
the person gets pleasure by watching a 
person of opposite sex doing urination or 
defecation in public or asking them to 
urinate on him or her. 

SEXUAL HARASSMENT 

Many cases are reported every day of sexual 
harassment of women by the superiors at their 
workplace; such cases created a strong public 
awareness to fight this evil. Government of India 
has taken a serious view to fight this evil. A specific 
provision has been made in CCS (Conduct Rules), 
1964, prohibiting sexual harassment of women by 
government servants. This provision is Rule 3- C 
of CCS (Conduct Rules), 1964. The government 
can initiate severe penal action against its 
employees. In private institutions also, rules have 
been made to deal with this menace. The rules are 
based on the guidelines and norms laid down by 
the Supreme Court in Vishaka and others versus 
State of Rajasthan and others [JT 1997 (7) SC 384]. 

It is necessary and expedient for employers in 
workplaces as well as other responsible persons or 
institutions to observe certain guidelines to ensure 
the prevention of sexual harassment of women. 

Definition 

For this purpose, sexual harassment includes such 
unwelcome sexually determined behaviour 
(whether directly or by implication) as: 


1. Physical contact and advances. 

2. A demand or request for sexual favours. 

3. Sexually coloured remarks. 

4. Showing pornography. 

5. Any other unwelcome physical, verbal or 
non-verbal conduct of sexual nature. Where 
any of these acts is committed in 
circumstances whereunder the victim of 
such conduct has a reasonable apprehension 
that in relation to the victim’s employment 
or work whether she is drawing salary, or 
honorarium or voluntary, whether in 
government, public or private enterprise, 
such conduct can be humiliating and may 
constitute a health and safety problem. It is 
discriminatory, for instance, when the 
woman has reasonable grounds to believe 
that her objection would disadvantage her 
in connection with her employment or work 
including recruitment or promotion or when 
it creates a hostile work environment. 
Adverse consequences might be there if the 
victim does not consent to the conduct in 
question or raises any objection thereto. 

Criminal Proceedings 

Where such conduct amounts to a specific offence 
under the Indian Penal Code or under any other 
law, the employer shall initiate appropriate action 
in accordance with law by making a complaint with 
the appropriate authority. In particular, it should 
ensure that victims, or witnesses are not victimised 
or discriminated against while dealing with 
complaints of sexual harassment. The victims of 
sexual harassment should have the opinion to seek 
transfer of the peipetrator or their own transfer. 

MEDICO-LEGAL ISSUES IN AIDS AND STD 

AIDS and STD have raised a lot of medico-legal 
issues in India and abroad. The issues can be 
divided into: 


CFMT-19 (3rd Proof).p65 


131 


8/16/07, 4:49 PM 


















132 Concise Textbook of Forensic Medicine and Toxicology 


1. Medical 3. Ethical 

2. Social 4. Legal 

Medical Issue 

The issue, which often raises controversy, is the 
rights of patients or victims of AIDS and STD. 
Every patient or victim has the right to receive 
treatment for the disease. AIDS testing is not 
compulsory in India. Nobody can be forced to go 
for such testing. However, government has the 
right to enforce it during screening tests for 
government jobs. It is a common knowledge that 
hospital workers can get infected while treating 
AIDS patients and can bring lawsuits for 
compensation. The patients can be referred to the 
designated hospitals in case of AIDS/STD where 
adequate facilities are provided to deal with such 
cases. 

Social and Ethical Issues 

In our society, carrying of AIDS/STD is a big 
stigma and doctors are duty bound to maintain 
secrecy to protect the identity of patients. They 
can disclose this information only after express 
consent of the patient or relatives in case of the 
deceased. However, in certain cases information 
can be divulged and this is called ‘privilege 
communication’. 

Privilege Communication 

It is agreed that whatever information a doctor has 
acquired during treatment of that patient has to be 
kept confidential, but doctor has to perform his duty 
to society also. In such cases, disclosure of 
information is called ‘privilege communication’. 
In this regard, we have to understand what is 
absolute and qualified communication. 

1. Absolute Privilege: It applies to any 
statement made in the court of law or 
parliament or state assembly. It also extends 
to statement made to lawyer during 
preparation for a court hearing as whatever 


has been said in these cases cannot be a 
ground for libel or slender. 

2. Qualified Privilege: Any disclosure made 
by the doctor can be protected if following 
conditions are met: 

(a) The statement must not be malicious and 
must be in good faith to a person who 
has the right to receive it. For example, 
if a person suffering from STD intends 
to use public swimming pool, the doctor 
can make disclosure about his disease 
to the in-charge of the swimming pool 
but not to any other person. 

(b) Only relevant information needs to be 
conveyed to the appropriate authority 
and not the whole medical history of the 
individual. In 1998, the honourable 
Supreme Court of India passed an order 
in a case where a patient has sued the 
doctor as he has disclosed to his fiancee 
that he is suffering from AIDS and 
subsequently his marriage was cancelled 
on receipt of this information. The 
honourable Supreme Court observed ‘So 
long as the person is not cured of the 
communicable venereal disease or 
impotency, the right to many cannot be 
enforced through a court of law and shall 
be treated as suspended right, and if a 
person suffering from the dreadful 
disease like AIDS, knowingly marries a 
woman and thereby transmits the 
infection to that woman, he would be 
guilty of offences under Section 269 
I.P.C. (negligent act likely to spread 
infection/ disease dangerous of life) and 
Section 270 I.P.C. (malignant act likely 
to spread infection/disease dangerous to 
life). Moreover, where there is a clash 
of the fundamental rights, as in this 
instance, namely, the doctor’s right to 
privacy as part of right of life and the 
bride’s right to lead a healthy life, which 
is her fundamental right under Article 21, 


CFMT-19 (3rd Proof).p65 


132 


8/16/07, 4:49 PM 


















Sexual Offences 133 


the right which would advance public 
morality or public interest, would alone 
be enforced through the process of law. 

Legal Rights 

Affliction of AIDS and STD raises a lot of legal 
rights of the victims. The victims may sue the 
assailant for damages and criminal intention. If a 
person in full knowledge of the fact that he is 
suffering from AIDS, sexually assaults a woman/ 
man with added intention to infect her/him so that 
she/he will die, can also be booked under Section 
307 (attempt to murder) or under Section 3021.P.C. 
(murder) if person dies because of that along with 
different Sections like 269 and 270 I.P.C. 

The presence of STD/AIDS on the sexual 
partner in case of manned couple can be taken by 
the other spouse as a ground of divorce as it can be 
granted easily if this plea is taken in the court of 
law. 

If a person gets AIDS during discharge of his 
professional duties as in hospital workers, he can 
sue hospital authorities if sufficient infrastructure 
facilities are not available. No worker can be 
discharged from services only on the fact that he is 
HIV (human immunodeficiency virus) positive, his 
other health parameters also have to be taken into 
consideration, if he is fit otherwise, he cannot be 
removed from service. 

MEDICO-LEGAL ASPECTS OF SEXUAL 
OFFENCES 

Rape Trauma Syndrome 

After rape, woman passes through great mental 
trauma. According to Sutherland and Scherl, rape 
trauma syndrome consists of psychological 
responses in victims of rape, of shock, dismay and 
non-specific anxiety. Burgess et al. defined rape 
trauma syndrome in two stages: 

(a) Immediate or an acute disorganisation 
phase consists of emotional reactions of 


several kinds like feeling of guilt and 
humiliation. 

(b) A long term reorganisation phase during 
which victim readjusts her life as far as 
possible. She may have nightmares and 
phobia during such time. In western 
countries, rape crisis centres are set up to 
deal with rape trauma syndrome. In such 
centres, psychological support is offered 
through counselling. 

RAPE DURING SLEEP OR UNCONSCIOUSNESS 

Under ordinary circumstances, it is not easy to rape 
a well bodied adult female unless she is thrown 
accidentally and is unable to move. She may be 
raped if she is exhausted. It is not possible to rape 
a woman if she is sleeping. It may be possible that 
she may allow a person to have sexual intercourse 
thinking that he is her husband. It is possible to 
rape a woman if she is unconscious either due to 
injury or drugs or alcohol. If a woman has 
voluntarily taken some drug or alcohol, and then 
gives consent under that influence, she cannot 
charge a man of rape. 

Date Rape 

Date rape is said to occur when a woman complains 
that she has been raped by her boyfriend when both 
of them have gone together for vacation or a stay 
at some place. She may allege that she has been 
given some drug or alcohol with an intention to 
get consent. 

She may even say that she has been raped in 
a hotel room. In India, concept of date rape in not 
recognised although many western countries 
acknowledge it. In these cases, less severe 
punishment is given to the accused as it is assumed 
that the woman has given some sort of consent 
when she has gone for date with her boyfriend. 
There are various drugs available in the market 
which can be easily mixed in alcohol or food, 
which make a woman unconscious or 


CFMT-19 (3rd Proof).p65 


133 


8/16/07, 4:49 PM 


















134 Concise Textbook of Forensic Medicine and Toxicology 


semiconscious and she may consent to sexual 
intercourse under the effect. 

False Charges 

Sometimes, false charges may be made against a 
person by introducing chilies into vagina of small 
children to produce congestion. In such cases, wash 


sample should be taken from vagina and sent for 
chemical analysis. A seminal stain on genitalia or 
clothes may be simulated by a solution of starch or 
egg white. 

A blood stain may be simulated by application 
of blood of some bird or animal. In all such 
suspected cases, samples taken would prove 
innocence of the accused. 


CFMT-19 (3rd Proof).p65 


134 


8/16/07, 4:49 PM 


















CHAPTER 

Legitimacy and Medico-legal 
Aspects of Marriage Annulment 


DEFINITION OF LEGITIMACY 

The legitimate child is one who is bom out of 
wedlock or within a competent time after the 
cessation of marriage. Under Section 112 of the 
Indian Evidence Act there is a presumption that 
even after a lapse of 280 days of dissolution of 
marriage, a child birth is possible and the child can 
be considered legitimate. Duration of 280 days is 
not absolute. Even if a child has been born after 
280 days, and supported by enough evidence, the 
child would be considered legitimate. 

MEDICO-LEGAL ASPECTS OF LEGITIMACY 

The question of legitimacy arises in the following 
situations: 

1. Disputed Paternity: A woman may 
approach a court of law alleging that the 
paternity of her child should be fixed and 
allege that some particular person is the 
father of the child. She may claim 


has substituted a living child against a dead 


born or feigned pregnancy to claim 
property. 

Medico-legal Considerations 

The medico-legal importance of pregnancy is as 
follows: 

1. Duration of Pregnancy: The average 
duration of pregnancy is considered as 280 
days or 40 weeks, although it may vary from 
woman to woman. The formula to calculate 
expected time of delivery is to add 9 months 
to the last menstrual day plus 7 days. 

2. Maximum Period of Pregnancy: 

Although it is not exactly known to what 
period pregnancy can continue, in India, 
law does not fix any maximum limit of 
gestation. Cases have been reported where 
females have given birth even after 352 
days from the last day of menstruation. 
Each case has to be evaluated on its own 
merits. 

Minimum Period of Pregnancy: The child 
born on or after 210 days or 7 months is 
considered viable. However, cases have 
been reported where children born in even 
less than 210 days have also survived. 
Superfecundation: It means fertilisation of 
two ova of the same period of ovulation by 


compensation to bring up the child. 

2. Inheritance: A child may approach a court 
of law through her/his mother to claim the 
property of her/his putative father. 

3 . F ictitious Child : A matter may be brought 

to the notice of the court that the mother 4. 


CFMT-20 (3rd Proof).p65 


135 


8/12/07, 9:39 AM 


















136 Concise Textbook of Forensic Medicine and Toxicology 


two acts of sexual intercourse at different 
times. Such occurrence is very rare in 
human beings. 

5. Superfetation: It means fertilisation of an 
ovum belonging to the subsequent cycle of 
ovulation when already one ovum from 
previous cycle is fertilised and is growing. 
Such occurrence in human beings is possible 
especially if it is a bipartite uterus. 

6. Paternity: The question of paternity 
assumes great significance in cases of 
adultery, divorce, matrimonial disputes and 
property inheritance. The various tests by 
which paternity disputes can be sorted out 
are: 

(a) Blood grouping: By matching blood 
groups of child, mother and putative 
father exclusion of paternity can be 
possible in some cases. The common 
system of blood groups used are ABO, 
Rh and MNS system. 

(b) HLA typing: By HLA typing of blood, 
exclusion of about 98 per cent is 
possible. 

(c) DNA fingerprinting: This is most 
appropriate to fix paternity. It is 100 per 
cent reliable. This technique was devised 
by Alec Jeffreys of the U.K. In this, 
sequences of bases in DNA strands of 
chromosomes are used for comparison. 
It is now widely available in India. 

MEDICO-LEGAL ASPECTS OF MARRIAGE 
ANNULMENT 

According to the provisions of the Hindu Marriage 
Act 1955, Special Marriage Act 1954, Indian 
Divorce Act, Parsi Marriage and Divorce Act, any 
marriage solemnised under them can be declared 
null and void under following conditions: 

1. Bigamy, i.e. if one spouse has made one 
more marriage. 


2. Impotence. 

3. If either party is underage. 

4. If one spouse is having unsound mind at 
the time of marriage, virulent form of leprosy 
or venereal disease in a communicable 
form. 

5. If one spouse has not been heard of as being 
alive for a period of 7 years or undergoing a 
sentence of imprisonment for 7 years. 

The wife can also seek divorce if husband has 
been guilty in cases of rape, sodomy or bestiality. 

Marriage can also be declared voidable: 

1. If the consent has been obtained by coercion 
or fraud. 

2. If the woman was already pregnant with 
someone else’s child at the time of 
marriage. 

3. On account of wilful refusal of either party 
to consummation of marriage by an act of 
sexual intercourse which is natural and 
complete. 

Adultery 

It means sexual intercourse between one spouse 
and a person of opposite sex, not his or her spouse, 
during subsistence of marriage. 

It is punishable under law for a maximum 
sentence of up to 2 years. But in the crime of 
adultery, only the male is punished, woman is not 
punished. The cases of adultery can be proven by 
circumstantial evidences such as non-access of 
husband and birth of child. Contracting of venereal 
diseases from some person other than spouse, 
evidence of going to brothels are circumstantial 
evidences which point toward adultery. 

Impotence 

Impotence is a ground for divorce. But it must be 
present at the time of marriage, and continue to be 
present at the time of filing lawsuit. 


CFMT-20 (3rd Proof).p65 


136 


8/12/07, 9:39 AM 


















Legitimacy and Medico-legal Aspects of Marriage Annulment 137 


Desertion 

Wilful neglect for more than 2 years showing 
deliberate voluntary withdrawal from living 
together without the consent of spouse is a ground 
for divorce. If husband and wife have been living 
separately for more than 1 year, they can file for 
divorce on mutual consent. 

Cruelty 

Legally, cruelty is defined as danger to life, limb, 
physical or mental health, or a reasonable 
apprehension of such danger. Cruelty can be 
physical or mental. 


Wife Battery 

Some husbands routinely resort to physical violence 
to their wives usually after drinking. 

In such cases, on medical examination, a 
woman may be seen having multiple injuries of 
various durations, suggesting that she has been 
beaten on more than one occasion. Abnormal sexual 
practices also amount to cruelty. 

A special provision in Section 498A of the 
I.P.C. deals with cruelty, and states that “whoever, 
being the husband or the relative of the husband of 
a woman, subjects such woman to cruelty shall be 
punished with imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to three years and shall also be liable to fine”. 


CFMT-20 (3rd Proof).p65 


137 


8/12/07, 9:39 AM 


















CHAPTER 

21 

Infanticide 


DEFINITION 

Infanticide is defined as “an unlawful destruction 
of a newly-born child”. It is equivalent to a murder 
and is tried under Section 302 of the I.P.C. and is 
punishable. In many western countries there are 
separate laws on infanticide but in India it is not 
so. All the cases of infanticide are treated at par 
with murder cases. 

Infanticide is quite common in India especially 
with the girl child. Due to social pressure and 
customs, the child is done away with within minutes 
to hours after birth. When the body of the child is 
detected, it is brought for post-mortem examination 
to the doctor. In such cases, investigating officer 
may raise following queries: 

1. Was the child stillborn or dead born? 

2. Was the child born alive? 

3. If born alive, how long did the child survive? 

4. What was the cause of death? 

These queries are needed for investigation as 
the prosecution has to prove beyond doubt that the 
child was born alive before it was done away with. 
So, the doctor has to conduct post-mortem on the 
lines of the above queries. 

WAS THE CHILD STILLBORN OR DEAD 
BORN? 

Stillborn 

World Health Organisation defines stillbirth as the 
child which has issued forth from the mother after 


28 weeks of pregnancy and did not at any time after 
being completely expelled breathe or show any 
signs of life. It means that before birth, the child 
was quite well in uterus but died during the process 
of delivery. Stillbirths are quite common in poor 
people, illegitimate and immaturely delivered 
children. On post-mortem examination, no 
abnormality is found in most of the cases. The lungs 
would be found irrespirable but no signs of 
maceration are seen. 

Deadborn 

A dead born child is the one who has already died 
in the uterus long ago and may show following 
features due to putrefaction already begun in utero: 

1. Maceration: It is a sterile process in utero 
as the air has not reached inside the uterus. 
Due to maceration, the body of the foetus 
becomes soft, flaccid and a peculiar 
sweetish disagreeable smell is present. The 
skin may be red in colour. Large blebs may 
be seen on the body which may exude 
serous fluid. Epidermis can be peeled off 
easily. The characteristic features are seen 
in cranial cavity where cranial bones are 
separated and may overlap each other. This 
feature can be seen by radiological 
examination and is diagnostic. The brain 
tissue is converted into a mass. The viscera 
inside the body starts losing their shape and 


CFMT-21 (3rd Proof).p65 


138 


8/12/07, 9:39 AM 


















Infanticide 139 


may reduce into a pulpy mass. On 
histological examination, evidence of 
phagocytosis may be seen. If air enters into 
liquor amnii due to rupture of membranes, 
the foetus goes into putrefaction rather than 
maceration. 

2. Mummification: This is sometimes seen in 
conditions where the foetus dries due to 
deficient supply of blood from uterine 
vessels and liquor amnii is dried up. Air has 
not entered the uterus in such cases. 

WAS THE CHILD BORN ALIVE? 

According to Indian law, live birth is—when any 
part of living child has been brought out during 
delivery, though the child may not have breathed 
or been completely born. If a charge of murder has 
to be proved, it should be established that the child 
was born alive. Normally, the cry of the baby is 
considered as the sign of live birth but in some 
cases, the child may cry even while he is in uterus 
or vagina but dies when completely born. The 
evidence of live child birth has to be proved by the 
doctor in a court of law. The most important criteria 
that doctor has to establish is whether respiration 
has taken place or not. To determine this, the 
following criteria should be taken into 
consideration: 

1. Shape of Chest: The chest becomes arched 
or drum-shaped after respiration has started, 
before which, it is flat. 

2. Diaphragm: While conducting post¬ 
mortem to establish live birth, it is advisable 
to open abdomen first, so as to notice the 
position of diaphragm. It is found at the level 
of fourth or fifth rib if respiration has not 
taken place and its arch is concave. But once 
respiration has taken place, the arch 
becomes flattened and comes at the level of 
the sixth or seventh rib. 

3. Lungs: 

(a) Volume: Lungs are quite small with 
sharp margin before respiration is 


established. But once it is established, 
they grow in size and fill the chest and 
attain round margins. 

(b) Consistency: Before respiration the 
lungs are firm, dense and liver-like and 
are non-crepitant. Once respiration is 
established, they become crepitant and 
spongy. 

(c) Colour: Lungs are reddish-brown 
before respiration. If a cut section is 
made, it exudes frothless blood. But 
becomes rosy red in colour once 
respiration in established. On cut 
section, blood with froth comes out as 
alveoli are now filled with air. 

(d) Weight: The lungs become double in 
weight after respiration due to air and 
inflow of pulmonary blood. 

Hydrostatic Test 

This is the most commonly done clinical test to 
know whether respiration has taken place or not. 
The specific gravity of the unrespired lung is more 
than one (1.04—1.05) while that of respired lung is 
less than one (0.94). Due to this fact, respired lung 
would float in water while unrespired lung would 
sink. 

Procedure: First, both the lungs are removed 
along with trachea and larynx and are put in a glass 
vessel. It is to be noted whether they float or sink. 
Then they are separated and are individually tested 
whether they float or not. The lungs are cut into 
small pieces and are put to test for floatation. If 
these pieces float, they are squeezed between thumb 
and index finger in water to look for small air 
bubbles which come out. If the pieces continue to 
float and exude air, it means respiration has taken 
place. If some pieces sink and others float, it means 
feeble respiration has taken place. The following 
aberrations may be seen: 


CFMT-21 (3rd Proof).p65 


139 


8/12/07, 9:39 AM 


















140 Concise Textbook of Forensic Medicine and Toxicology 


1. False Negative Cases: The lungs which 
have been expanded with air may sink due 
to following reasons: 

(a) Diseases like bronchopneumonia may 
cause lungs to become heavy as the air 
in the alveoli may be replaced with acute 
oedema or pus. 

(b) Diseases like atelectasis may cause 
nonentry of air into alveoli although air 
has entered into the respiratory column. 

(c) Due to feeble respiration, sometimes air 
may not be able to reach the alveoli, so 
the lungs are not expanded although the 
child has respired. 

2. False Positive Cases: The unexpanded 
lungs in these cases may float due to 
following reasons: 

(a) Putrefaction: Putrefactive gases may 
cause floatation of the lungs. Signs of 
putrefaction on the rest of body may also 
be seen. 

(b) Artificial respiration: If a child has not 
started taking respiration immediately, 
he is put on artificial respiration and air 
is made to enter the lungs forcefully. 
This air, after entering alveoli, may 
cause floatation of lungs later on when 
the child is declared dead. 

When Hydrostatic Test is not Needed 

In the following conditions, there is no need to 
conduct a hydrostatic test: 

1. When foetus is below 180 days of gestation. 

2. When there are congenital malformations 
which make life impossible, like monster 
child. 

3. Signs of intrauterine maceration seen. 

4. The umbilical cord is separated from the 
naval which shows signs of cicatrisation. 

5. Stomach has presence of food, or water can 
be demonstrated in small intestine. 


Changes in stomach and intestines 

When respiration is established and the child begins 
to cry, a small amount of air enters into the stomach 
within 5-15 minutes of birth. This small amount 
of air can be detected in the small intestine after 
1-2 hours. A portion of this air also passes into the 
large intestine after a gap of 5-6 hours. The air in 
stomach, small intestine and large intestine can be 
demonstrated by dissecting them under water. This 
is also known as Breslau’s second life test. This 
test is useless if putrefaction has started or an effort 
has been made to give artificial respiration. 

If water, or food is detected in stomach or small 
intestine, it is proved that the child has lived for 
some time. 

IF BORN ALIVE, HOW LONG DID THE CHILD 
SURVIVE? 

From the following changes, some idea can be had, 
of how long did the child survive before dying: 

1. Changes in the Skin: The vernix caseosa 
is present all over the body in a newborn 
child, and remains there up to 24 hours. The 
colour of a newborn baby changes from 
bright red to a darker one in 2-3 days and 
the baby assumes normal colour in 7 days. 

2 . Caput Succedaneum : It is prominent at the 
time of birth, more so in deliveries done by 
forceps. It disappears in 2-3 days. 

3. Umbilical Cord Changes: At the time of 
birth, umbilical cord is cut and clotting in 
the cut-end stops in 2 hours. The cord starts 
drying in 24 hours. It starts to shrivel in 3- 
4 days and finally falls off on 5th-6th day, 
leaving an ulcer which heals in 10-12 days. 

4. Changes in Circulatory System: 
Umbilical vessels start obliterating as they 
are not required. They close in about 3 days. 
The foetal haemoglobin also starts reducing. 
The ductus arteriosus closes in 10 days. The 
foramen ovale closes in 2nd-3rd month. 


CFMT-21 (3rd Proof).p65 


140 


8/12/07, 9:39 AM 


















Infanticide 141 


WHAT WAS THE CAUSE OF DEATH? 

The cause of death could be natural, accidental, or 
homicidal. 

1. Natural Causes: The following are the 
natural causes: 

(a) Immaturity: It is one of the commonest 
reasons where child is born before full 
gestation. 

(b) Congenital diseases: Death could be 
due to syphilis or plague. 

(c) Malformations: Monster child like 
acephalous or anacephalus may not 
survive longer. 

(d) Haemorrhage: Haemorrhage occurring 
due to placenta previa or any other 
reason from uterus, umbilical cord or 
vagina can cause death of foetus or 
mother. 

(e) Rh incompatibility: This is also one of 
the reasons for death. 

2. Accidental Causes: Accidental death of the 
child can occur during birth or after that. 
During birth, death may occur due to: 

(a) Prolonged labour 

(b) Prolapse of cord 

(c) Strangulation due to knots around the neck 
by umbilical cord 

(d) Inadequate pelvis: Pelvis size may be 
smaller, or the child is bigger. 

(e) Injuries: Heavy blows on the abdomen of 
a pregnant woman can cause death of foetus. 
In such cases, the woman may start bleeding 
immediately after the blows. Child may get 
injured while coming out of pelvis. Child 
may get injuries sometimes, if delivered by 
forceps. 

(f) Death of mother: If mother dies 
accidentally during labour or otherwise, 
child in the uterus would die if not taken 
out immediately. The child may die after 
birth because of following reasons: 


(i) Suffocation: The child may die of 
suffocation if respiratory passages are 
not clear due to presence of blood, 
meconium or liquor amnii. Suction 
should be initiated immediately to save 
the child. A child may also die of 
suffocation, if he/she is wrapped closely 
in clothes. 

(ii) Precipitate labour: In this, a child is 
born without the mother’s knowledge 
and child may fall on ground or lavatory 
pan and may get injuries. Such labour 
is possible in a multiparous woman with 
a roomy pelvis, or if the child is quite 
small and can come out without effort. 
Precipitate labour is not common. 

HOMICIDAL OR CRIMINAL CAUSES 

The child may die because of: 

1. Act of Commission: When wilful 
mechanical violence is used to kill the child 
or the child is poisoned. 

2. Act of Omission: It is due to neglect of the 
child. 

Act of Commission 

(a) Suffocation: On birth, the child is killed by 
applying pressure by a pillow or soft tissue 
or introducing foreign body in the 
respiratory passage. The child may also die 
if the mother overlays intentionally over the 
child. The child may also be suffocated 
while applying pressure on chest. 

(b) Strangulation: It is also a common method 
of killing a small child. A ligature like 
pyjama, tape or any cord may be used. 
Sometimes, umbilical cord is used to 
strangulate, to mimic natural death. Child 
may well be throttled. 

(c) Drowning: In some communities the child, 
especially a female child, is killed by 


CFMT-21 (3rd Proof).p65 


141 


8/12/07, 9:39 AM 


















142 Concise Textbook of Forensic Medicine and Toxicology 


plunging the face into milk so that milk is 
aspirated into respiratory passage causing 
death. This custom is called “Dudh Pita 
Kama.” Sometimes, a live child may be 
thrown in a river or pond to kill him/her, or 
a child may be thrown into water often first 
killing him/her by strangulation or 
suffocation. 

(d) Mechanical violence: The child may be 
killed by hitting her/his head with an object 
causing fractures or head injury. The 
fracture/dislocation of neck may be caused 
by forcibly rotating the head of the child. 
The child may also be killed by inflicting 
fatal injuries by sharp-edged weapon. 

(e) Poisoning: A small child can easily be killed 
by giving poisons such as opium. 

Act of Omission 

Failure to take proper precautionary steps during 
child birth are acts of omission. The following are 
some of the examples: 

(a) Omission to take proper medical care. It is 
presumed that the woman who is going to 
deliver has contacted a medical practitioner 
or paramedical staff in advance to take care 
of her and her baby during delivery. 

(b) Omission to ligate the cord after the cord is 
cut, otherwise haemorrhage may bleed the 
child to death. 

(c) Omission to remove child from the 
discharges from mother and failure to 
remove the discharges present in respiratory 
passages by suction. 

(d) Omission to protect from cold or heat of the 
environment. 

(e) Omission to provide proper food and care 
to the newborn child. 

Relevant Legal Sections 

1. Section 317 of the I.P.C. provides 
punishment for a maximum term of seven 


years or fine, or both, for any person who 
exposes a new born child to any place with 
the intention of abandoning it and death 
does not supervene. The offender would be 
punished for murder if death occurs. 

2. Section 318 of the I.P.C. defines punishment 
for a maximum of 2 years or fine or both in 
cases where the mother is charged with 
concealment of birth by secretly burying or 
otherwise disposing off the dead body of 
the newborn child. 

Caffey’s Syndrome 

It is also known commonly as ‘battered baby or, 
child abuse syndrome’. They are usually small 
children often less than one year but may be less 
than 4-5 years of age. They usually have multiple 
injuries of various durations. It suggests that the 
child has been beaten many a times over a certain 
period of time. They may have multiple rib injuries, 
multiple bruises over various parts of the body. 
Usually, parents deny any injury happening to child 
accidentally. These children usually come from 
problem families having multiple problems like 
parental maladjustment, foster parents, alcoholism 
or poverty in family. Sexual abuse of the child may 
also be seen in such cases. 

SUDDEN INFANT DEATH SYNDROME OR 
COT DEATHS 

These are unexpected unnatural deaths seen in 
young infants. They are found dead in the morning 
with no previous history of illness. They are 
commonly seen in the age group of 1-6 months, 
most commonly at 3 months. The incidence is 
around 1-2 per 1000 live births. On post-mortem 
examination, no obvious cause is seen. Although 
the exact reason of such deaths is not known but 
the following are some of the hypotheses advocated 
by some authors: 


CFMT-21 (3rd Proof).p65 


142 


8/12/07, 9:39 AM 


















Infanticide 143 


1. Sleep Apnoea: In such cases there may be 
prolonged apnoea during sleep causing 
death. 

2. Chronic Viral Infections: They may cause 
sudden death with no obvious clinical findings. 


3. Autoimmune Reaction: Some autoimmune 
changes in the body may induce sudden 
death. Sudden infant death syndrome is now 
a recognised clinical entity and is under 
WHO classification of natural cause of death. 


CFMT-21 (3rd Proof).p65 


143 


8/12/07, 9:39 AM 


















CHAPTER 


22 

Abortion and Medical Termination 
of Pregnancy 


DEFINITION OF ABORTION 

It means spontaneous or induced termination of 
pregnancy before the foetus is viable. Normally, 
the foetus becomes viable after 20 weeks of 
pregnancy. But sometimes, children born before 20 
weeks of pregnancy have also survived. With better 
medical facilities available now, it is possible to 
save premature babies more easily and more often. 

‘Abortion’ usually refers to expulsion of 
fertilised ovum within 3 months of gestation. If 
expulsion occurs between 4-7 months of 
pregnancy, it is called ‘miscarriage’. Premature 
baby is defined as a baby who comes out before 
full-term but usually after 7 months of pregnancy. 
It takes about 7-10 days for fertilised ovum for 
implantation. Up to 9th week, the fertilised ovum 
is called ‘embryo’ thereafter, it is called ‘foetus’. 

CLASSIFICATION OF ABORTION 

Abortion is classified into following categories: 

1. Natural Abortion: It is called ‘spontaneous 
abortion’ too and commonly occurs within 3 
months of pregnancy. About 10-15 per cent of all 
pregnancies are aborted within 3 months of 
pregnancy. 

The following are the common causes of 
natural abortion: 


(a) Acute systemic infections like respiratory 
or abdominal infections. 

(b) Hypertension, diabetes mellitus and 
systemic diseases. 

(c) Blood disorders like anaemia, Rh 
incompatibility. 

(d) Blunt trauma to abdomen. 

(e) High anxious states like sudden shock, fear, 
joy, sorrow or emotional set-up. 

(f) Acute infection of vagina, uterus or ovaries. 

(g) Congenital malformation of uterus, fibroids, 
etc. 

(h) Genetic abnormalities of foetus. 

(i) Idiopathic. 

2. Induced Abortion: It may be of following types: 

(a) Therapeutic abortion: This abortion is 
done by a medical practitioner under the 
ambit of Medical Termination of Pregnancy 
Act 1971 at a place duly authorised by law. 
Under the Act, a pregnancy can be legally 
terminated on following grounds: 

(i) Therapeutic grounds: It applies when 
the continuation of pregnancy would 
endanger the life of the woman, or would 
cause grave injury to her physical or 
mental health. In this case, pregnancy 
can be terminated at any stage. 

(ii) Eugenic: Eugenic grounds involve the 
risk of child being born with serious 
physical or mental abnormalities like 


CFMT-22 (3rd Proof).p65 


144 


8/12/07, 9:39 AM 


















Abortion and Medical Termination of Pregnancy 145 


anencephaly, big head, Turner’s 
syndrome, Down syndrome, etc. 

(iii) Humanitarian: If the pregnancy has 
been caused by rape, it can be terminated 
under humanitarian grounds. 

(iv) Social grounds: Social grounds apply 
for termination in case of a married 
woman where: 

- Pregnancy has resulted due to failure 
of contraceptive methods adopted. 

- Continuation of pregnancy can cause 
injury to physical or mental health 
of the woman by changing social or 
economic environment. 

The termination of pregnancy has to be 
done at a government hospital or any 
nursing home or hospital duly authorised 
by government authorities. If the duration 
of pregnancy is less than 12 weeks, one 
registered medical practitioner can terminate 
it. But if the pregnancy is above 12 weeks 
but less than 20 weeks, two medical 
practitioners are required for termination. 
No pregnancy above 20 weeks can be 
terminated except when warranted to save 
the life of the woman (under therapeutic 
grounds). The registered medical 
practitioners conducting the termination of 
pregnancy must be registered with medical 
council and be duly competent to conduct 
abortion. A medical practitioner with M.D. 
degree in obstetrics and gynaecology or 
diploma in gynaecology and obstetrics or 
MBBS degree holder who has assisted in at 
least 25 cases of medical termination of 
pregnancy under supervision is competent 
to perform abortion under the Act. 

The place where termination is done 
should be well equipped with facilities for 
the operation and administration of 
anaesthesia and should be recognised by 
competent authorities. 

Consent: Consent of the woman is 
mandatory except when she is minor or 


mentally ill. In such cases, consent from 
parents or guardians can be taken. Consent 
of the husband of the married woman is not 
necessary. 

Emergency cases: In case of emergency 
any registered medical practitioner of any 
specialty irrespective of obstetrics and 
gynaecology can terminate pregnancy at any 
place, irrespective of duration if it is done 
to save the life of the pregnant woman. 

(b) Criminal abortion: When the abortion is 
not done as prescribed under Medical 
Termination of Pregnancy Act, it is called 
‘criminal abortion’ and is punishable under 
law. 

Most of the criminal abortions are done 
within first 3 months of pregnancy. In India, 
female foeticide is very common as some 
people have a strong desire for male child. 
They keep on doing female foeticide till the 
woman is pregnant with a male child. In 
some communities where dowry demands 
are quite high, female foeticide is very 
common. They get to know the sex of the 
foetus by ultrasound. The sex of the baby is 
differentiated at 4 months of gestation and 
can be easily detected by ultrasound. If the 
foetus is a female, parents opt for abortion. 
In order to prevent foeticide, the 
Government of India has banned ultrasound 
examination for detection of sex under the 
Pre-conception and Pre-natal Diagnostic 
Techniques (Prohibition of sex selection) 
Act, 1994. 

In poor families, criminal abortion is 
common as they cannot afford to go to 
private clinics for abortion, and opt for 
unskilled health workers for abortion. 
Although in a government hospital there is 
no charge for MTP. still abortion by 
unskilled workers is quite common in India. 

WHO has defined ‘unsafe abortion’ as 
abortion not provided through approved 
facilities and/or persons. 


CFMT-22 (3rd Proof).p65 


145 


8/12/07, 9:39 AM 


















146 Concise Textbook of Forensic Medicine and Toxicology 


Unsafe abortion is very common in 
India. Section 312 of the I.P.C. defines 
‘causing miscarriage’ as an abortion done 
is not in good faith and will be punishable 
with a sentence ranging from 3 to 7 years, 
even if the abortion is done with the consent 
of the woman. Section 313 of the I.P.C. 
states whoever conducts an abortion without 
consent of the woman may get 
imprisonment from 10 years to life 
imprisonment. Section 314 states that if a 
person causes death of a woman while doing 
miscarriage without her consent, he can be 
punished up to life sentence and if he is 
doing with consent of woman, he can be 
punished up to 10 years. 

INDUCTION OF ABORTION 

Methods of Inducing Abortion under MTP Act 

Under the MTP Act the following methods can be 
used for inducing abortion: 

1 . Medical Method: It can be done up to 49 days 
or less. In this, the patient is given 600 mg of 
Mifepristone as a single oral dose. It is followed 
by 400 Llgm of Misoprostol as a single dose after 2 
days. Bleeding follows and products of conception 
are expelled. Patient should be advised to follow 
up after 14 days for confirmation of termination of 
pregnancy. Adverse effect include excessive 
bleeding, vaginitis or uterine haemorrhage. It is 
contra indicated in confirmed or suspected ectopic 
pregnancy. 

2. Surgical Methods: The surgical methods used 
for inducing abortion are as follows: 

(a) Vacuum Aspiration: It is a very common 
method in which the products of conception 
are aspirated by vacuum. It is ideal for 
pregnancy up to 12 weeks of gestation. 

(b) D and C (dilatation and curettage): It is 
practised till 20th week. In this, the cervical 
canal is dilated and probe is introduced in 


uterine cavity, and curettage is done in 
uterine wall to remove products of 
conception. 

(c) Hysterotomy: It is done in cases where 
sterilisation is also desired along with 
abortion. 

(d) Hysterectomy: It may be performed in an 
elderly patient. In this, uterus is completely 
removed. 

3. Other Methods: The following methods also 
cause abortion but nowadays they are not practised. 

Medical methods: In this, hypertonic 
saline, urea or rivanol, and prostaglandins 
are placed intrauterine, which enhance 
uterine contraction and cause products of 
conception to be expelled. 

Complications of MTP 

The complications that might occur during MTP 
are, as follows: 

1. Immediate Complications: Include 

haemorrhage leading to shock, even death, 
perforation of uterus, vagina or intestine, 
endometritis and sometimes there may be 
incomplete abortion when some products of 
conception are still retained in the uterus. 

2. Late Complications: Include sterility, 
menstrual disturbances, etc. 

Methods of Inducing Criminal Abortion 

Generally, there are two methods to induce criminal 
abortion: 

1. Drugs: The following are the common drugs 
used for abortion and are commonly called 
‘abortifacient drugs’: 

(a) Ecbolics: These drugs act on pregnant 
uterus and cause contraction to expel the 
products of conception: 

(i) Ergot preparations 

(ii) Synthetic oestrogens 

(iii) Strychnine 


CFMT-22 (3rd Proof).p65 


146 


8/12/07, 9:39 AM 


















Abortion and Medical Termination of Pregnancy 147 


(iv) Quinine 

(v) Pituitary extract. 

They are required to be given in high doses 
and cause systemic side effects. 

(b) Emmenagogues: These drugs increase 
menstrual flow and can be used for inducing 
abortion. Common examples are borax, 
sanguinarin, oestrogen preparations, savin, etc. 

(c) Irritants: Common genitourinary irritants 
like cantharides, oil of turpentine, or oil of 
tansy can be used to stimulate pregnant 
uterus to expel products of conception. 
Other gastrointestinal irritants which 
increase bowel movement like castor oil. 
senna, croton oil, purgatives cause abortion 
as they can increase uterine contractions. 

(d) Systemic poisons: Some systemic poisons 
like arsenic, phosphorus, mercury, Abrus 
precatorius, calotropis and plumbago are 
also used to induce criminal abortion. 

(e) Abortion pills: Abortion pills made of lead, 
diphenylethylene are sometimes used. 

2. Violence: It may be local violence or general 
violence: 

(a) General violence: It is commonly used in 
first month where a violent activity may 
induce uterine contraction and cause 
abortion. Commonly, severe forms of 
exercise, excessive cycling, riding, jumping, 
and alternative use of hot and cold bath may 
induce abortion. Violent massage on the 
abdomen and violent pulling of abdominal 
wall may cause abortion. 

(b) Local violence: This is commonly used in 
third or fourth month. Violent punching in 
the abdominal area may cause abortion. 
Unskilled or semi-skilled workers use 
instruments locally to induce abortion. 

3. Unskilled Abortion: In India, unskilled abortion 
is quite common among poor classes. Because of 


lack of education and means to afford good medical 
care, they become susceptible to unskilled workers 
commonly called Dais. Anything which can 
penetrate through cervix like needle, hairpin, pencil, 
etc., may be used. An instrument commonly used 
by dais is called ‘abortion stick’. It is usually a 
thin wooden or bamboo stick about 15-20 cm long. 
On one end, irritant juice of marking nut or paste 
of arsenic, red lead or asafoetida is applied on a 
cotton and is introduced into the uterus through os 
of cervix. Because of irritation due to juices or 
rupture of membranes due to force of stick, the 
products of conception are expelled out. It is usually 
followed by haemorrhage or sepsis and woman may 
die in such a process. Every year, thousands of 
women die in India because of this. The abortion 
stick may sometimes cause perforation in uterus 
or intestine or urinary bladder and may cause 
further complications. 

Sometimes, water or irritants may also be 
introduced in the uterus through syringes. 

Causes of Death Due to Criminal Abortion 

Death in criminal abortion occur in following ways: 

1. Immediate Causes: It may be: 

(a) Vasovagal shock: It may be due to high 
state of anxiety in the woman or due to 
introduction of a syringe or stick. 

(b) Haemorrhage: It is the most common 
immediate complication. It may be due 
to damage of uterine vessels. 

(c) Air-embolism: It may occur if vessels 
of the uterus are exposed to air when 
the stick is introduced and air also travels 
with it. 

2. Late complications: These included: 

(a) Sepsis: It is the most common late 
complication. Infection may occur while 
abortion is done and may cause death if 
not controlled. 


CFMT-22 (3rd Proof).p65 


147 


8/12/07, 9:39 AM 


















148 Concise Textbook of Forensic Medicine and Toxicology 


Table 22.1 Difference between nulliparous and parous uterus 



Nulliparous uterus 

Parous uterus 

l. 

Size 

Small (7 cm x 5 cm x 2 cm) 

Large depending on period of 




gestation 

2. 

Weight 

35^-0 gm 

May be 30-100 gm 

3. 

Uterine cavity 

Cavity appears triangular, 

Walls are concave, bigger oval 



walls are convex 

appearance 

4. 

Upper surface 

Almost horizontal 

Convex 

5. 

External os 

Small roundish 

Transverse slit-like opening 

6. 

Internal os 

Circular and well defined 

Ill-defined 

7. 

Ratio of body and cervix 

50:50 

66:33 

8. 

Placental attachment 

None 

Scar may be seen 


(b) Sterility: In some cases, sterility may 
occur if uterine mucosa is also denuded 
at the time of operation. 

(c) Uterine adhesions: These may also 
occur. 

Medico-legal Significance 

A doctor may be called upon to opine on: 

(a) Whether a woman has aborted recently. 

(b) Examination of a dead woman who may 
have died during criminal abortion. 

Signs of Recent Abortion in Living 

A woman who has recently aborted may show the 
same signs as found in a pregnant woman of the 
same gestation. In this, local examination should 
be carefully done. A slight discharge may be seen. 
The cervical os may show some discharge and 
slight opening. Some tears in vagina due to 
application of instruments, may be seen. If a 
woman has recently delivered, her general physical 
condition remains bad for 1 or 2 days. 

Examination of Dead Woman Who has Died 
of Criminal Abortion 

Here, the signs of pregnancy would be visible 
outside the body corresponding to the period of 
gestation. Breast may show enlargement. Woman’s 


body may appear pale if she has died of 
haemorrhage. Local examination is very crucial 
(Table 22.1). Examination of vagina and uterus may 
be done for injury, presence of products of 
conception, foreign body like pin, abortion stick, 
discharge, etc. If death has occurred due to air 
embolism, signs of embolism may be present. If 
death has occurred due to sepsis, pus may be seen 
in uterine cavity. Sometimes, perforation of uterus 
or intestine may be seen. 

Examination of Aborted Material 

The doctor may be asked to opine sometimes on 
the aborted material to know the age, sex and 
development of the aborted foetus. The aborted 
material should be examined carefully as the 
foetus may be in multiple pieces due to 
instrumentation. To determine the age of the 
foetus, there is generally a rule called Haase’s 
rule, which states that to know the age of foetus 
up to 5 months, the square root of the length of 
the foetus should be taken while after 5 months, 
the length of the foetus should be divided by 5 to 
know the age in months. So, up to 25 cm of length 
of foetus (about 5 months of gestation) the square 
root should be applied to know the age in months. 
Above 25 cm of foetal length it should be divided 
by 5 to know the foetal age in months. The 
following developments in the foetus should be 
remembered to know the developmental cycle: 


CFMT-22 (3rd Proof).p65 


148 


8/12/07, 9:39 AM 





















Abortion and Medical Termination of Pregnancy 149 


1. First Month: Length is about 1 cm. Eyes 
as dark spots can be seen. Very short cord 
can be seen. Mouth is seen as cleft. If 
abortion is done at this stage, embryo can 
be missed in blood clots as it is very small. 

2. Second Month: Length is about 4 cm. 
Mouth and nose are separated. Anus appears 
as a dark spot. Sex is indistinct. Centres of 
ossification are seen in mandible, clavicle, 
ribs, vertebrae. 

3. Third Month: Length is about 9 cm. 
Placenta is developed. Head is separated 
from the body by the neck. The eyes and 
mouth are closed. The sex is still not clear. 
Centres of ossification are seen in in most 
bones. The heart is divided into two 
chambers. 

4. Fourth Month: Length is about 16 cm. 
Weight is 100 gm. Sex can be differentiated. 
The skull bones are partly ossified. Foetus 
can be seen on X-rays. The gall bladder is 
forming. 


5. Fifth Month: Length is 25 cm, weight is 
300 gm. Hair seen on scalp. The centres of 
ossification are seen in os pubis. Bile is seen. 

6. Sixth Month: Length is 30 cm, weight is 
700 gm. Centres of ossification are seen in 
sternum. Eyelashes start appearing. 

7. Seventh Month: Length is about 35 cm, 
weight 1400 gm. Centres of ossification 
commence to form in talus. Generalised 
development is seen. 

8 . Eighth Month: Length is 40 cm and weight 
is 2 kg. The centre of ossification is seen in 
last vertebrae of sacrum. This month, the 
foetus becomes viable from medico-legal 
point after 210 days. 

9. Ninth Month: Length is 45 cm, weight is 
2.5 kg. The scrotum receives the two testes. 
Centre of ossification in lower epiphysis of 
femur is present. 

10. Tenth Month: Mature child is ready for 
independent existence. Length is 50 cm and 
weight is about 3 kg. 


CFMT-22 (3rd Proof).p65 


149 


8/12/07, 9:39 AM 


















CHAPTER 

Insanity and Forensic Psychiatry 


DEFINITION OF INSANITY 

The word “insane” has no technical meaning and is 
commonly used to refer to individuals who cannot 
take care of themselves or adhere to the social fabric, 
due to some mental disorder. It refers to individuals 
who by virtue of being mentally ill. are not competent 
to discharge their legal duties and are not aware of 
the legal implications of their behaviour. In the Indian 
Penal Code, the phrase ‘unsoundness of mind’ is 
used as synonymous to terms such as insanity, lunacy, 
madness or any mental disorder where a person is 
not capable of regulating Iris behaviour according 
to the socio-legal system. 

A medical officer is often called upon to opine 
whether a person is insane or not. He should not 
opine in a hurried manner, instead he should 
examine the person in detail and then express his 
opinion. 

CAUSES OF INSANITY 

The potential causes of insanity are as following: 

1. Heredity: Insanity often runs in families. 
The exact reason is not known. Usually, 
most of the mental diseases are not 
transmitted genetically but it has been 
observed that mental illness runs in families. 

2. Environmental Factors: If during the early 
years of childhood, the upbringing of a child 
is not taken well care of, there are chances 


of developing mental illness. Attitude of 
both parents is very important in shaping 
good personality. Over protection, rejection, 
unnecessary peer comparison, or sibling 
rivalry can cause maladjustment in a child. 
Emotional maladjustment is quite common 
in adolescent period. A good sex education 
is very essential for adolescents to fashion 
their personality according to the social 
fabric. In adults, domestic quarrels, financial 
and business losses, failure in love, death 
of near ones, unemployment and job 
pressures can precipitate mental illness. 

3. Organic Causes: Head injuries like cerebral 
haemorrhages, high fever and epilepsy may 
induce mental disorder. Addiction to 
alcohol, opium and dhatura may induce 
violent behaviour. Addiction to severe 
narcotics like heroin, cocaine and LSD may 
cause anti-social behaviour, and the person 
may commit crime. In severe, systemic 
diseases like uncontrolled hypertension, 
diabetes or other debilitating diseases, the 
person may land up in depression. 

ONSET OF INSANITY 

The onset of insanity is gradual. The person may 
be brought to the medical officer for treatment. In 
some cases the person may malinger to avoid 
punishment. So, the medical officer has to decide 
whether insanity is true or false (Table 23.1). 


CFMT-23 (3rd Proof).p65 


150 


8/16/07, 2:17 PM 


















Insanity and Forensic Psychiatry 151 


Table 23.1 Differences between true and feigned insanity 


Features 

True insanity 

Feigned insanity 

1. Onset 

Usually slow but rarely 
sudden 

Always sudden 

2. Motive 

No motive seen 

Motive may be there 

3. Precipitating cause 

May be there 

Usually absent 

4. Physical features 

Typical of illness, 
looks are vacant, agitation 
may be seen, excitation or 
depression may be there 

Person appears normal, looks are 
normal, over-reaction may be seen 

5. Signs and symptoms 

Usually point to a particular 
illness like MDP, depression, 
schizophrenia 

Signs and symptoms keep on 
changing 

6. Observation 

If left alone, signs and symptoms 
remain as such 

Signs and symptoms disappear if 
the person thinks that he is not 
being observed 

7. Physical activity 

Depends on the type of illness, but 
person is not exhausted 

Person exhausts easily 

8. Associated manifestations 

Anorexia, not proper eating, 
insomnia may be seen 

None 

9. Personal hygiene 

Usually very bad and filthy 

Personal hygiene is good 

10. Medical examination 

Does not mind repeated 
examination 

Resents multiple examinations 

11. Recovery 

Depends on the type of mental 
illness, usually slow 

Very fast recovery seen if person is 
granted bail or released from the 
mental hospital 


CLASSIFICATION OF MENTAL DISEASES 

The classification of mental diseases is done 
according to two well-accepted methods which are 
as follows: 

1. DSM IV: This is an American system. It 
stands for Diagnostic and Statistical Manual 
of Mental Disorders, IVth edition 1994. 

2. ICD-10: It means international classification 
of diseases, injuries and cause of death. 10th 
edition, 1992. 

ICD-10 classification is more popular and 
is followed worldwide. 

The following is the classification of mental 
diseases according to the World Health 
Organisation: 

1. Psychosis (Major Illness): It may be of 
following types: 


(a) Organic psychosis: When there is an 
organic cause associated with psychosis, 
it is called ‘organic psychosis’. Common 
examples are alcoholic psychosis, 
psychosis following head injury, 
endocrine disturbances, old age, 
epilepsy, drug dependence, etc. 

(b) Functional psychosis: In this, there is 
no apparent cause of psychosis. It is of 
following types: 

(i) Schizophrenia. 

(ii) Manic-depressive illness. 

(iii) Paranoid state. 

2. Neurosis (Minor Illness): The following 
are the common types of neurosis: 

(i) Anxiety neurosis. 

(ii) Depression. 

(iii) Hypochondriacal. 


CFMT-23 (3rd Proof).p65 


151 


8/16/07, 2:17 PM 





















152 Concise Textbook of Forensic Medicine and Toxicology 


(iv) Obsessive compulsive neurosis. 

(v) Hysterical neurosis. 

3 . Personality Disorders as in Psychopaths. 

4. Sexual Perversions. 

5. Drug Dependence. 

Before going into details of mental diseases, 
let us understand common terms used in forensic 
psychiatry: 

1. Abreaction: This is a release phenomenon 
where old, forgotten things or events are 
brought into conscious state again. 

2. Affect: It is commonly called mood or 
feeling. 

3. Amnesia: Loss of memory about a person 
or event is called ‘amnesia’. 

4. Aphasia: Loss of sensory or motor ability 
to express by use of speech or writing is 
called ‘aphasia’. 

5. Binet-Simon Test: It is done to determine 
the intelligent quotient of an individual. 

6. Circumstantiality: When a person is not 
able to answer properly, in a straight manner, 
and keeps on giving irrelevant details or 
wanders off the subject many times in a 
conversation, the condition is called 
circumstantiality. 

7. Compulsion: It is a repetitive behaviour 
done by an individual in spite of knowing 
that it is not correct. Examples being, 
repeatedly washing hands, checking locked 
premises again and again. 

8. Delirium: It is an altered state of 
consciousness. The mental faculty of an 
individual does not work properly. It may 
be seen in high grade fevers (organic 
delirium) or in different psychological 
problems (functional delirium). 

9. Delusion: It is a false belief which remains 
even when confronted with material facts. 
The person is not convinced by any reason 
or logic. 

Following are the common types of delusion 
found in clinical practice: 

(a) Delusion of grandeur: The person 
thinks he is very rich, powerful and may 


squander away his money or property. 
This is a pleasant delusion. 

(b) Delusion of persecution: The person 
thinks that people are after him and may 
kill him, or harm him. The person 
remains suspicious and depressed and 
may commit some crime. 

(c) Delusion of reference: The person 
thinks that everybody is thinking about 
him only, and this may put him in 
conflict with the world. 

(d) Hypochondriacal delusion: The person 
in this delusion thinks that he is ill 
always, while medically he may be 
completely fit. He keeps on visiting 
doctors. Usually the person gives vague 
abdominal complaints. 

(e) Delusion of infidelity: In this, the 
person thinks that his/her spouse is not 
loyal to him/ her. Usually, males suffer 
more from this delusion as compared to 
females. The person may commit crime 
in this state. 

(f) Nihilistic delusion: In this, the person 
does not believe that the world exists and 
may commit suicide or kill others. 
Medico-legally, delusions are very 
important as they affect the behaviour 
of an individual and he may come in 
conflict with law or society. The 
responsibility of the individual 
committing crime under delusion has to 
be fixed in accordance with the law. 

(g) Erotomania: In this, a women thinks 
that a particular person, especially 
superior, is in love with her. 

(h) Pseudologia fantastica: This is a 
variation of Munchausen’s syndrome in 
which a person feels convinced that he 
is seriously ill and keeps on visiting 
many doctors in vain. 

10. Fugue State: The person becomes a 

wanderer who keeps on moving from place 

to place in an altered state of mind. He has 


CFMT-23 (3rd Proof).p65 


152 


8/16/07, 2:17 PM 


















Insanity and Forensic Psychiatry 153 


episodes of amnesia. This stage is seen in 
depression, schizophrenia and other mental 
disorders. 

11. Hallucination: It is a false sensory 
perception which manifests without any 
cause or objective or stimulus. They are 
usually of the following types: 

(a) Auditory hallucinations: Here, the 
person hears voices of known or 
unknown persons. They are quite 
common in schizophrenia. In some cases 
a person hears a command from God or 
Satan to do certain acts which may land 
up the person in conflict with law. 

(b) Visual hallucinations: The person may 
see lights or images or scenes. Such 
hallucinations are quite common in 
schizophrenia, epilepsy and drug 
withdrawal syndromes. 

(c) Olfactory and gustatory hallucinations: 
Such hallucinations involving smell and 
taste are quite common in organic brain 
disease, depression, etc. 

(d) Tactile hallucinations: They are 
commonly seen in cocaine addiction 
where bugs seems to be creeping in layers 
of skin. 

Hallucinations are very important 
from the medico-legal point of view as 
mostly, hallucinations pin-point to a 
major mental illness, although 
physiological hallucinations usually at 
the time of sleep or arousal are reported 
in normal individuals. 

(e) Lilliputian: In this a person perceives 
objects to be of a much smaller size than 
they actually are. 

(f) Synaesthesia : In this, a person perceives 
a different sensation from a different 
organ like he may visualize music or 
hear different colours. 

12. Illusion: It is false perception due to 
distortion of real sensory stimulus. Optical 
illusions are quite common in deserts where 


water may be seen at places. A rope may be 
seen as a snake at night. Illusions are usually 
of three types: 

(a) Completion illusion : Where an unfinished 
pattern is completed by illusion. 

(b) Affect illusion: In this, mood of the 
person affects the nature of illusion. 

(c) Parabolic illusion: When human faces 
or images are seen in illusion. 

In illusion, the person may be corrected 
when confronted with facts. He realizes 
that it was a misinterpretation of 
stimulus. 

13. Impulse: This is defined as a sudden and 
irresistible force which compels a person 
to do some action without motive or 
thinking. Normally, a normal person always 
tries to analyse his actions whether they are 
consistent with law or not. Once he realises 
that his action may be contrary to law he 
stops it. But in impulse, a person is not able 
to control himself. 

The following types of impulses are seen 
in clinical practice: 

(a) Kleptomania: An irresistible desire to 
steal things usually of low value. 

(b) Pyromania: An irresistible desire to set 
things on fire. 

(c) Mutilomania: An irresistible impulse to 
maim animals. 

(d) Dipsomania: An irresistible impulse to 
drink at periodic intervals. 

(e) Sexual impulses: All sexual perversions. 

(f) Homicidal impulses: To kill some 
persons. 

(g) Suicidal impulses: To commit suicide. 
Impulses are quite commonly seen in 
various mental disorders like depression, 
schizophrenia, mania, etc. 

(h) Trichotillomania: It is an irresistible 
desire to pull out one’s own hair. 

14. Lucid Interval: It is a phase of sanity 
between two episodes of insanity. In this, 
the person is completely normal and is 


CFMT-23 (3rd Proof).p65 


153 


8/16/07, 2:17 PM 


















154 Concise Textbook of Forensic Medicine and Toxicology 


legally answerable for all his actions. He 
can execute will or do any testamentary 
instruments. Lucid interval is commonly 
seen in manic-depressive psychosis. It has 
great medico-legal significance. 

15. Obsession: An obsession is defined as a 
persistent and irresistible thought, image, 
affect or impulse that cannot be removed 
by the sufferer although he knows that this 
is foolish. He continues to suffer. When this 
converts into action, it is called 
‘compulsions’. The person keeps on 
repeating foolish behaviour though realising 
that it is untrue. Normal persons also 
sometimes have obsessions but they 
overcome them over a period of time. But 
once it becomes pathological, it may turn 
into obsessive compulsive neurosis. The 
common examples are: 

(a) the person may keep on checking the locks 
even though he knows that he has bolted 
them well. 

(b) The person may keep on washing hands for 
hours. 

16. Phobia: It is an excessive or irrational fear 
of an object or situation. Common phobia 
include: 

(a) Claustrophobia: Fear of enclosed spaces. 

(b) Agoraphobia: Fear of open spaces. 

(c) Fear of flying in aircraft. 

(d) Fear of animals, snakes, lizards. 

17. Psychosis and Neurosis: There are 
differences commonly seen between these 
two main mental illnesses (Table 23.2). 

Table 23.2 Difference between psychosis and neurosis 


18. Psychopath: It refers to individuals who 
have psychopathic personality. They are 
usually antisocial and have long criminal 
records. They have no remorse feeling and 
are not amenable to counselling. Some of 
them have extra Y chromosome in their 
chromatin. 

19. Dementia: It is defined as degeneration of 
mental faculties once they have been fully 
developed. Dementia can occur at any stage 
of life. Usually, higher functions of life are 
impaired. Dementia may be due to old age 
(senile dementia), Alzheimer’s disease, head 
injury, epilepsy, alcohol, etc. Usually, persons 
suffering from dementia remain within social 
fabric without breaking the law. 

20. Mental Handicap: It refers to mental sub¬ 
normality in an individual, acquired at the 
time of birth or early childhood. Intelligent 
quotient is low. It is usually of the following 
types: 

(a) Idiocy: Here, I.Q. level is around 20. 
The person is mentally retarded severely. 
He may be associated with some other 
genetic problems too. He may need 
physical and mental rehabilitation to 
lead a normal life. Usually, idiots remain 
cheerful as their achievement goals are 
almost absent and they can lead their life 
easily on a survival basis. 

(b) Imbecile: Their I.Q. level is between 20 
and 50. They are incapable of managing 
their affairs themselves. They also require 
physical and mental rehabilitation by a 
therapist to lead a normal life. 




Psychosis 

Neurosis 

1 . 

Severity 

Major 

Minor 

2. 

Genetic predisposition 

Present 

Absent 

3. 

Insight 

Person says he is well and 
does not require treatment 

Person feels that he is 
ill and needs treatment 

4. 

Contact with reality 

Lost 

Present 

5. 

Empathy 

Lack of empathy 

Present 


CFMT-23 (3rd Proof).p65 


154 


8/16/07, 2:17 PM 





















Insanity and Forensic Psychiatry 155 


(c) Feeble mindedness: Their I.Q. level is 
between 50 and 75. They appear normal 
but their mental faculties, especially 
intelligence, is less as compared to a 
normal person. They are usually school 
dropouts. They do not fare well in 
academic and financial career. They may 
get easily involved in criminal activities. 

Psychosis 

Psychoses are usually of the following two types: 

1. Manic-depressive Psychosis: It is expressed 
in following two phases: 

(a) Mania phase: In this, the person is very 
active, full of life, talking too much, 
mostly irreverent, the mood is elated and 
he does some action continuously. But 
he does not have touch with reality. He 
can commit any crime during this phase. 
Sleep is very less. Appetite is also less. 

(b) Depressive phase: It is just the reverse 
of mania. The person is very sad, mood 
is depressed. The person sits alone and 
may speak very little. Touch with reality 
is not there. He may commit suicide. The 
motor functions are also quite depressed. 
A person suffering from manic- 
depressive psychosis may fluctuate 
between the two phases of mania and 
depression. It may be possible that the 
person may be normal between the two 
phases of mania. This may be lucid 
interval and the person is completely 
responsible for his actions. 

2. Schizophrenia: Literally it means 
disintegration of mind. Commonly also 
called ‘split personality’. The exact reason 
of schizophrenia is not known but it runs in 
families. There is a complete loss of reality. 
Depending upon the changes, the following 
are the types of schizophrenia commonly seen: 


(a) Simple schizophrenia: It is the 

commonest type. It mainly affects the 
mood of the person. He remains depressed, 
talks very little and is withdrawn. The 
motor activities are quite less. 

(b) Hebephrenia: In this type, the thought 
process is primarily derranged. 
Incoherence of thoughts, delusions and 
hallucinations are reported. The motor 
activities are also quite less. 

(c) Catatonic: In this type, the behaviour 
of the person is primarily abnormal. 
There is a wild excitement and violent 
and abusive behaviour. Homicidal and 
suicidal tendencies are very high. The 
person may assault someone on minor 
provocations. Sometimes, the person 
may be so violent that he needs to be 
restrained by force. 

(d) Paranoid schizophrenia: Suspicion is 
the primary thought process in this type. 
The person may be thinking that some 
persons are behind him and can kill him. 
He may have suspicion about his wife, 
parents, kids, friends and colleagues. It 
occurs more in males than in females. 
Delusions are very common. Usually, 
personality is well preserved and these 
people are detected as suffering from 
mental illness after a long time. Auditory 
hallucinations are quite common. He 
may commit crime as he thinks people 
are after him. 

Schizophrenia is a major illness. It is quite 
common in the lower strata of society. 

Neurosis 

Neurosis is a minor mental illness. It is of following 
types: 

1. Anxiety Neurosis: It is a very common 
variety. The person remains anxious about 
future events, relationships and individuals. 


CFMT-23 (3rd Proof).p65 


155 


8/16/07, 2:17 PM 


















156 Concise Textbook of Forensic Medicine and Toxicology 


His pulse rate may be high, blood pressure 
raised, respiratory rate high and he may be 
sweating. He may be restless, confused and 
apprehensive. Treatment usually involves 
counselling and use of anti-anxiety drugs 
like diazepam. Meditation also helps a lot. 

2. Depression: It is the reverse of anxiety. Here, 
a person would be aloof, sad and withdrawn. 
His motor activities would be quite less. He 
may have a low appetite and may not eat well. 
However, in chronic cases of depression, the 
person may keep on eating the whole day, 
while withdrawn at home and hence may 
gain weight. The following are the types of 
depression commonly seen: 

(a) Reactive depression: It may be due to 
some event or situation like the death of 
spouse or a near one, failure in exam, 
love, etc. It usually remains there for 
sometime. Some form of reactive 
depression is seen in all individuals. 
Usually, with counselling and use of 
anti-depressive drugs, most come out of 
it. 

(b) Endogenous depression: It is more 
serious as its aetiology is not known and 
develops slowly. Early morning 
awakening, loss of appetite and mood 
depression are quite common. This 
depression may be associated with 
psychosis too, where it carries a bad 
prognosis. Usually with anti-depressive 
drugs, most of the individuals recover. 

(c) Puerperal depression: A woman who 
has recently delivered may have 
depression commonly called ‘puerperal 
depression’. She may even kill her infant 
during this time. 

(d) Involutional depression: During the 
age group of 50-60 years, depression 
may set in. Delusion of hopelessness and 
unworthiness may be present. Due to 
development of hypertension, diabetes 


or somatic illness, person may get into 
depression. Counselling, along with 
drugs is very useful. 

(e) Hypochondriacal depression: In this 
type of neurosis, the person usually 
complains of vague aches and pains and 
may keep on visiting many physicians 
but of no avail. Usually no treatment is 
effective. 

3. Obsessive-compulsive Neurosis: As 

described earlier, obsession is a foolish 
thought which a person knows but cannot 
avoid. But once this thought turns into 
action, it is called compulsion and may lead 
to obsessive-compulsive neurosis. 
Common examples are repeated washing 
of hands to remove dirt, continuous 
checking of already locked premises, etc. 

4. Hysterical Neurosis: It is usually seen in 
females where there may be convulsions 
or stoppage of breath. Tonic and clonic 
convulsions are reported. It should always 
be differentiated from epilepsy, which it can 
be confused with. In hysterical neurosis, the 
person will never get hurt or bite the tongue, 
as it is seen in epilepsy. Some cause or 
intention can be found out in hysterical 
neurosis while in epilepsy usually no cause 
is found. Hysterical neurosis can be treated 
with counselling or correction of the 
underlying cause (Table 23.2). 

Psychoses Associated with Organic 
Diseases or Drugs 

These are of the following types: 

1 . General Paralysis of the Insane: It is due 

to syphilitic infection, which, when affects 
the brain cells, causes degeneration of 
neuronal cells which slowly leads to 
paralysis and dementia. As syphilis infection 
is detected early nowadays, general paralysis 
of the insane is not as frequently seen now 


CFMT-23 (3rd Proof).p65 


156 


8/16/07, 2:17 PM 


















Insanity and Forensic Psychiatry 157 


as in the past. It starts quite late after syphilis 
infection (10-20 years) and manifests as 
headache, giddiness, followed by personality 
changes. 

2. Psychosis due to Epilepsy: Psychosis does 
develop in some cases of epilepsy, but not 
in all, especially in the untreated ones. There 
are bouts of uncontrollable mania, followed 
by normalcy. Hallucinations and delusions 
are reported. Sometimes twilight state is 
seen. Twilight state is seen as narrowing of 
fields of consciousness of short durations, 
followed by amnesia. Visual hallucinations 
are quite common. Behavioural changes are 
seen. 

3. Psychosis due to Head Injury: Sometimes, 
as a result of head injury, there may be 
discontinuation or damage of neuronal cells, 
or there may be space occupying lesion due 
to haemorrhage, or direct damage. It may 
sometimes cause behavioural changes in the 
individual. This may worsen, leading to 
psychosis. 

4. Psychosis due to Chronic Alcoholism 
(Korsakoff’s Psychosis): It is characterised 
by loss of memory, confabulation and 
disorientation to time, place or person. The 
person may have ataxia, peripheral neuritis 
and encephalopathy. 

5. Psychosis due to Drugs: Narcotics like 
opium, cannabis, cocaine, LSD, dhatura, 
etc. may cause psychosis on long-term use. 

RESTRAINT OF A MENTALLY ILL PERSON 


The Mental Health Act 1987 replaced the Indian 
Lunacy Act 1912 and introduced new terms as 
follows: 


Outdated terms 

New terms 

1. Mental asylum 

Psychiatric hospital or 


nursing home 

2. Lunatic 

Mentally ill person or 


mentally challenged person 

3. Criminal lunatic 

Mentally ill prisoner 


The Act also defined certain terms, viz.: 

1. Medical Officer: It means a gazetted 
government doctor appointed by the 
state government. 

2. Mentally Ill Person: A person suffering 
from mental disorder other than mental 
retardation, and requires treatment. 

3. Mentally Ill Prisoner: A mentally ill 
person ordered for detention in a 
psychiatric hospital, jail or other safe 
custody. 

4. Psychiatric Hospital or Nursing 
Home: A hospital for mentally ill 
persons maintained by government or a 
private party, with facilities for out¬ 
patient treatment and registered with 
appropriate licensing authority. 

5. Reception Order: It means an order for 
admission and detention of a mentally 
ill person in a psychiatric hospital or 
nursing home. 

6. Relative: It includes any person related 
to a mentally ill person by blood, 
marriage or adoption. 

Immediate Restraint 

According to the Act, if a mentally ill person is 
dangerous to himself or others, or likely to injure 
himself, squander his property or that of others, he 
can legally be kept under immediate restraint in a 
psychiatric hospital. 

Immediate restraint under the care of family 
or relatives may be imposed with the consent of 
lawful guardians, or without their consent if 
urgently required. This restraint is only up to the 
time the person is having symptoms of mental 
disease/danger to others. 

Admission on Voluntary Basis 

If a person thinks that he is mentally ill and desires 
to get admitted in a psychiatric hospital for 
treatment, he can request the medical officer-in- 
charge for being admitted as a voluntary patient. If 


CFMT-23 (3rd Proof).p65 


157 


8/16/07, 2:17 PM 





















158 Concise Textbook of Forensic Medicine and Toxicology 


a person is minor, legal guardian can request on 
his behalf. If a medical officer-in-charge thinks that 
the person needs admission, he can admit him 
within 24 hours. If the admitted person wants to 
leave the hospital he can request the medical officer- 
in-charge, who can discharge him on request within 
24 hours of the receipt of the request. 

Admission under Special Circumstances 

Any mentally ill person who does not, or is unable 
to express his willingness for admission as a 
voluntary patient, may be admitted as an in-patient 
in a psychiatric hospital on an application made on 
his behalf by a relative or a friend if the medical 
officer-in-charge is satisfied, that in the interest of 
the mentally ill person, it is necessary to do so, 
provided he should not be kept admitted for a period 
exceeding 90 days except in accordance with the 
provisions of the Mental Health Act, 1987. Every 
application under this provision shall be in a 
prescribed form and be accompanied by two 
medical certificates from two medical practitioners, 
of whom one shall be in government service, stating 
that condition of the mentally ill person is such that 
he should be kept under observation and treated in 
a psychiatric hospital. If medical certificates from 
two medical practitioners are not there, even then 
the medical officer-in-charge of a psychiatric 
hospital can admit the mentally ill patient after 
getting him medically examined by two medical 
practitioners working in the hospital. 

Reception Order on Application 

An application for a reception order may be made 
by: 

1. Medical officer-in-charge of a psychiatric 
hospital. 

2. Husband, wife or any other relative of the 
mentally ill person. 

It is possible for them to do so if the medical 
officer-in-charge of the psychiatric hospital where 
the mentally ill person is admitted under temporary 
treatment order is satisfied that: 


1. The mentally ill person is suffering from 
such mental disorder that he needs 
admission for more than 6 months, or 

2. That it is necessary in the interest of the 
health and personal safety of the mentally 
ill person or for the protection of others that 
such person shall be detained in psychiatric 
hospital; he may make an application to the 
magistrate for reception order. 

Similarly, the wife or husband or a relative can 
submit an application for the reception order for 
detention of the mentally ill person into a 
psychiatric hospital. On receipt of application for 
a reception order, the magistrate may issue 
reception order if he is convinced. 

Reception Order on Production of Mentally III 
Person before the Magistrate 

If a police officer sees a mentally ill person 
wandering on streets and thinks he is incapable of 
taking care of himself, or if he thinks that this 
mentally ill person is dangerous due to his mental 
illness, he may detain a person in his custody and 
produce him before a magistrate. Once produced 
before the magistrate, he may examine the person 
to assess his capacity to understand, or get him 
examined by a medical officer. Once this is done, 
the magistrate may pass a reception order for the 
detention of the mentally ill person in a psychiatric 
hospital. 

Order in Case of Mentally III Person Cruelly 
Treated or Not under Proper Care and Control 

If a police officer finds that a mentally ill person is 
cruelly treated or not under proper care and control 
by family members or relatives, he may report to 
the magistrate of the area and seek orders. The 
magistrate in this case, after being convinced, may 
pass orders requiring the family members or 
relatives to take care of such mentally ill person. If 
they do not follow orders, punishment can be 
awarded. 


CFMT-23 (3rd Proof).p65 


158 


8/16/07, 2:17 PM 


















Insanity and Forensic Psychiatry 159 


Admission and discharge of mentally ill 
people: 

1. Admission as In-patient after Inquisition: 

If any court is holding an inquisition under 
Chapter VI of Mental Health Act, it may 
pass an order to admit a mentally ill person 
into a psychiatric hospital if the court is 
satisfied that it is in the interest of the patient. 

2. Admission and Detention of Mentally Ill 
Prisoner: The court may pass an order to 
admit a mentally ill prisoner to a psychiatric 
hospital if it is convinced that he needs 
admission. 

3. Discharge Order by Medical Officer-in- 
Charge of Psychiatric Hospital: Medical 
officer-in-charge of a psychiatric hospital 
may discharge the patient based on 
recommendation of two medical 
practitioners, one being a psychiatrist. 

CIVIL RESPONSIBILITY 

The mentally ill person may not be able to handle 
his property affairs due to mental illness. The 
Mental Health Act 1987 details the procedure to 
be adopted in such a case: 

Judicial inquisition regarding alleged 
mentally ill person possessing property, custody 
of his person and management of his property: 
An application may be moved before the district 
court by a relative, or public curator, or an advocate 
general for judicial inquisition into the mental 
condition of the person. On receipt of the 
application, the court issues notice to produce the 
person in the court. The court may order his medical 
examination by a psychiatrist or a psychiatric 
hospital. While submitting the report, the 
psychiatrist should mention in his report whether 
the person is suffering from a mental illness or not. 
The report should be a detailed one; it should 
specify the extent of mental illness and whether 
the person is capable of looking after his property 


or not. It may be possible that the person may be 
mental ill, still may be able to look after his 
property. After holding judicial inquisition, the 
court may decide as follows: 

1. If the court records that the person is 
mentally ill and is incapable of taking care 
of himself and of managing his property, it 
may order for the appointment of a guardian 
to take care of his person, and of a manager 
for management of his property. 

2. When the court finds that the person is 
mentally ill, can take care of himself but 
cannot manage his property, it may issue 
an order for the management of his property. 
The manager appointed by the court has full 
powers to manage the property and can 
execute all conveyances and instruments to 
such effect but has no power to mortgage 
or sell such property without permission 
from the court. 

CONTRACTS - RESPONSIBILITY 

Under India Contract Act, if one party is of unsound 
mind at the time of signing contracts, the contract 
would be invalid in the eyes of law. Similarly, if at 
the time of marriage, one party by reason of 
unsoundness of mind, is unable to understand the 
nature and responsibilities of the marriage, such 
marriage would be declared null and void. However, 
unsoundness of mind developing after marriage is 
no ground for divorce. Minor mental illness even at 
the time of marriage is not a ground for divorce. 

Evidence 

Section 118 of the Indian Evidence Act states that 
a lunatic is not competent to give evidence if he 
cannot understand questions put to him and answer 
rationally. But if he is in lucid interval, he can give 
evidence. It is left to the judge to decide whether 
to give credence to evidence given by a mentally 
ill person or not. 


CFMT-23 (3rd Proof).p65 


159 


8/16/07, 2:17 PM 


















160 Concise Textbook of Forensic Medicine and Toxicology 


Consent 

Section 90 of the I.P.C. provides that consent to 
certain acts is not valid if it is given by a person 
who, due to unsoundness of mind or intoxication, 
is unable to understand the nature and consequence 
of the consent. The question of consent arises in 
cases of rape, marriage, operation, etc. Consent 
given by a mentally ill person is invalid in the eyes 
of law. 

TESTAMENTARY CAPACITY 

It is also called capacity to make will. Testamentary 
capacity consists of: 

1. An understanding of the nature of the will. 

2. A knowledge of the property to be disposed 
off. 

3. An ability to recognise those who have 
moral claims in it. 

If a court finds that the person who made the 
will, at the time of making the will, was suffering 
from insufficient mental capacity to understand the 
nature and consequences of his act, it may set aside 
such a will. 

However, a will made by a mentally ill person 
during lucid interval is valid. A medical practitioner 
may be asked to examine whether a person is of 
sound mind or not, to make a valid will. The doctor 
should test his orientation to time, place and people, 
and then certify whether he is fit to make the will 
or not. Will made during drunken state is valid 
unless the person is too grossly intoxicated to 
understand the consequences of the act. 

CRIMINAL RESPONSIBILITY OF THE INSANE 
McNaughten’s Rule 

In 1843, one person named McNaughten, under 
delusion of persecution shot dead Mr. Drummond, 
the private secretary of Sir Robert Peel, Prime 
Minister of England. In fact, he wanted to kill Sir 


Robert Peel but since he could not identify him 
properly, he shot dead Mr. Drummond by mistake. 
He was later arrested and sent to prison. Since he 
was insane and there was no English law at that 
time to fix criminal responsibility of an insane, a 
committee of 14 judges were constituted to frame 
law which resulted in “McNaughten’s Rule” or 
“Legal Test” according to English law which states 
as follows: 

That to establish a defense on the ground of 
insanity, it must be clearly proved that “at the time 
of committing the act, the accused was labouring 
under such a defect of reason, from disease of the 
mind, as not to know the nature and quality of the 
act he was doing, or, if he did know it. that he did 
not know he was doing what was wrong.” 

In India, Section 84 of the I.P.C. defines the 
legal test or criminal responsibility of the insane, 
as: 

“Nothing is an offence which is done by a 
person who, at the time of doing it, by reason of 
unsoundness of mind, is incapable of knowing the 
nature of the act, or that he is doing what is either 
wrong or contrary to law.” 

Section 85 of the I.P.C. defines legal 
responsibility of a person under intoxication. If it 
is proved that a person was given intoxication 
without his knowledge or against his will, and due 
to intoxication he lost mental reasoning and then 
committed the crime, he will not be held responsible 
for it. Drunkenness caused by voluntary use of 
alcohol or drugs offers no excuse for committing 
the crime. 

Loss of Self-control or Sudden and Grave 
Provocation 

Sometimes, a person may lose self-control, or there 
is sudden and grave provocation, and as a result, 
he may commit crime. Common situation is that, 
if a person sees his wife teased by goons, he may 
lose self-control and may kill any goon. In such 
cases doctrine of partial responsibility is used and 


CFMT-23 (3rd Proof).p65 


160 


8/16/07, 2:17 PM 


















Insanity and Forensic Psychiatry 161 


the murder may be charged the under Section 304 
of the I.P.C. rather than Section 302 of the I.P.C. 
Section 304 the of I.P.C. prescribes less sentence 
as compared to Section 302 of the I.P.C. 

Somnambulism 

This is also called ‘sleep walking’. A person may 
move around while asleep and may commit some 
crime or theft, and then come back normally. He 
may not be aware that he has committed a crime. 
He will not be held responsible if it is proved that 
he has done this act while asleep. 

Hypnosis 

It is also a sleep-like stage, indeed by suggestion. 
But it is very difficult to convince a person in 


hypnosis to commit some act which he would not 
do in normal circumstances. It is a wrong 
impression that a person may commit murder under 
hypnosis. 

Some recent guidelines: One of the major 
defects in the McNaughten’s Rule, which is also 
reflected in Section 84 of the I.P.C. is that it does 
not take into effect the emotional aspects relating 
to unsoundness of mind. So, some neurotic 
disorders are not given any importance. Some 
western countries have taken this into consideration 
and have formulated some guidelines. Some of 
them are known as: 

(a) Durham Rule (1954) 

(b) Curren’s Rule (1961) 

(c) American Law Institute Test. 


CFMT-23 (3rd Proof).p65 


161 


8/16/07, 2:17 PM 


















CHAPTER 

Miscellaneous Topics 


EUTHANASIA 

Euthanasia is defined as intentional killing by act 
or omission, of a dependent human being for his 
or her alleged benefit. Some medical workers divide 
euthanasia into two types: 

1. Active Euthanasia: When the death is 
intentionally caused. 

2. Passive Euthanasia: There are some 
medical actions which are often described 
as passive euthanasia. These acts include not 
commencing treatment which would have 
not provided relief to the patient, or 
withdrawing treatment that has been found 
to be ineffective, too burdensome, 
unwanted, or prescribing high doses of pain 
killers that can endanger life of the patient. 
Such actions are part of standard medical 
practice. Since in these actions, there is no 
intention to kill the person, some workers 
do not consider it as euthanasia. Thus, 
euthanasia is not there till there is intention 
to kill. 

Reasons of Euthanasia 

The following reasons are cited in favour of 
euthanasia: 

1. Unbearable Pain: It is a major argument 
in favour of euthanasia. In terminal cases 


of cancer, an individual may suffer from 
unbearable pain even with the use of pain 
killers. But with the use of new dmgs and 
treatment, much of pain can be significantly 
reduced. 

2. Right to Commit Suicide: Most workers 
who support the doctrine of euthanasia 
believe that every person should have the 
right to commit suicide. But, if logically 
thought about, in this case there is no right 
of suicide as the act is done by an other 
person and thus amounts to murder. 

3. Should a Person be Forced to Stay Alive? 
An argument forwarded that whether 
vegetative life should be allowed to be kept 
on perpetual basis even against the wishes 
of the patient. It is cruel and inhumane. But 
now law is clear in such cases. Law does 
not ask doctors to keep death away forever 
in these cases. 

Reasons against Euthanasia 

The following reasons are cited against euthanasias: 

1. Definition of “Terminally Ill” is Not 
Conclusive: The term “terminally ill” is 
subjective and there can be gross misuse in 
selection of patients. It is also found that 
some terminally ill patients live for years or 
months together. 


CFMT-24 (3rd Proof).p65 


162 


8/14/07, 3:59 PM 


















Miscellaneous Topics 163 


2. Misuse by Hospitals to Reduce Health¬ 
care Cost: Some hospitals may have 
patients, on whom they have to spend a lot 
of money as they may be admitted in 
intensive care units for years, may be 
declared as terminally ill and may be 
considered for euthanasia. 

3. Importance and Value of Life would be 
Reduced in the Eyes of People. 

Euthanasia and Assisted Suicide 

Nowadays, concept of assisted suicide has also 
developed. The difference between euthanasia and 
assisted suicide lies in who performs the last act to 
cause death. 

In euthanasia, it is other person who performs 
the last act which causes death. For example, when 
a doctor gives a lethal injection, it is called 
euthanasia. But in assisted suicide, it is the person 
who himself performs the last act which causes 
death. For example, patient himself injects or drinks 
the poison provided by the doctor for causing death. 
It is also called as physician assisted suicide. 

Medico-legal Significance 

Euthanasia in any form is not allowed in India. It is 
a punishable offence under Indian Penal Code and 
person who does it may be prosecuted under the 
sections of murder, assisting suicide, etc. 

In some countries, however, it is legal. Oregon, 
the Netherlands and Belgium are the only places 
in the world where laws permit euthanasia or 
assisted suicide. Some countries like Australia 
introduced it for some time but seeing its misuse, 
it was later repealed. Worldwide opinion is that it 
should not be made legal as it can be grossly abused. 

TORTURE AND MEDICAL PROFESSION 

Torture of human beings is as old as human race 
itself. In order to increase influence over others, 
strong human beings have always beaten the weak 
folk. The major reasons for torture are looting 
wealth, snatching womenfolk or getting desired 
work done like using them as labourers. 


The U.N. convention against torture and other 
cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or 
punishment has defined torture as: 

“Any act by which severe pain or suffering, 
whether physical or mental, is intentionally 
inflicted on a person for such purposes as 
obtaining from him or third person, information 
or a confession, punishing him for an act he or 
third person has committed or is suspected to have 
committed, or intimidating or coercing him or a 
third person, or for any reason based on 
discrimination of any kind, when such pain or 
suffering is inflicted by or at the instigation of or 
with the consent or acquiescence of a public 
official or other person acting in an official 
capacity. It does not include pain or suffering 
arising from, inherent in or incidental to lawful 
sanctions.” 

In Indian law, torture is punishable with a term 
extending up to 7-10 years vide Sections 330 and 
331. 

Methods of Torture 

The methods of torture can be classified as follows: 

1. Physical Torture: It is most common. It is 

caused by infliction of pain on an individual. 

Various methods are: 

(a) Beating: The common weapons/ objects 
include baton, hands, feet or any other 
instrument. Usually, blunt weapons are 
used. Usual injuries are abrasions, 
contusion and lacerations. Head injury 
may be there. Sometimes, rupture of liver 
or hollow organs is also seen. 

(b) Falanga: Severe beating on soles of the 
feet is called ‘falanga’. This is quite 
common in police beatings as due to 
thick skin, injuries are not much 
obvious. 

(c) Ear torture: Twisting of external ear 
may be done. Beating on both ears may 
cause rupture of tympanic membrane 
and hearing loss. It is sometimes referred 
to as ‘telephano’. 


CFMT-24 (3rd Proof).p65 


163 


8/14/07, 3:59 PM 


















164 Concise Textbook of Forensic Medicine and Toxicology 


(d) Finger torture: Pencil or a small object is 
kept between fingers and pressed on. 

(e) Hair torture: Pulling of hair or dragging 
by hair. 

(f) Suspension: The victim may be suspended 
by legs, hands or hair and may be beaten 
with rods. 

(g) Forced position: The person may be forced 
to remain in forced positions for hours. 

(h) Electric torture: Electrodes may be kept 
on ears, tongue, genitalia or nipples. Small 
currents are passed which are very painful. 

(i) Suffocation: This is of two types: 

(i) Wet submarine: When head is thrown 
into water, blood, urine or vomitus. 

(ii) Dry submarine: When a plastic bag is 
applied on the face. 

(j ) Burning or cold torture : When heat or cold 
is applied to torture. 

2. Psychological Torture: The following are 
the common types of psychological tortures which 
are used. 

Deprivation techniques: The common 
deprivation techniques include: 

(a) Sensory deprivation: Keeping him in dark, 
noiseless room. He may be blind-folded. 

(b) Perceptual deprivation: Changing place 
many times while blind-folded so as to lose 
perception of places. 

(c) Deprivation of basic need: Holding of 
food, water, clothes, communication, etc. for 
a long time. 

(d) Social deprivation: Confining them to 
solitary cell. 

(e) Witness torture: Victims are forced to see 
the torture of fellow-victims so as to instil 
fear in them. 

(f) Threats and humiliation: Urination on 
victims, extending threats of death, showing 
sham executions. 


(g) Drugs: Drugs may be given to facilitate 
confessions like muscle relaxants, thallium, etc. 

3. Sexual Torture: The following are sexual 
torture techniques followed commonly: 

(a) Sexual torture using instruments: 

(i) Penetration of vagina or anus by batons, 
rods, bottles or similar objects. 

(ii) Suspension of weights on penis or 
scrotum. 

(iii) Electric torture of the sexual organs. 

(iv) Mutilation of breasts, genital organs. 

(b) Sexual torture without the use of 
instruments: 

(i) Verbal sexual abuse and humiliation 

(ii) Undressed in front of others 

(iii) Rape by person of the opposite sex 

(iv) Sexual assault by person of same sex 

(v) Squeezing breasts 

(vi) Forced to masturbate in front of others 

(vii) Forced to perform sexual torture on 
other victims 

(viii) Forced pregnancy 
(ix) Being photographed in humiliating 
positions and situations. 

(c) Sexual torture by using animals: 

(i) Rape by trained dogs, monkeys, etc. 

(ii) Rats, mice, spiders, lizards, etc., 
introduced into the vagina or anus. 

CUSTODIAL DEATHS 

These are deaths reported in police stations, jails 
and detention centres. A large number of deaths 
are reported everywhere from all over India. There 
are allegations many a times that such deaths are 
due to police torture during interrogation. Taking a 
serious view of such allegations during 
interrogation resulting in death, National Human 
Rights Commission, New Delhi has prescribed 


CFMT-24 (3rd Proof).p65 


164 


8/14/07, 3:59 PM 


















Miscellaneous Topics 165 


following guidelines to be observed while 
conducting post-mortem examination: 

1. Investigation in all cases of custodial deaths 
is to be conducted by a magistrate as defined 
in Cr. P.C. Section 176. 

2. The post-mortem should be conducted by a 
team of doctors. 

3. The video recording of post-mortem is a 
must in all cases and videotape should be 
sent to National Human Rights Commission 
as early as possible along with the post¬ 
mortem report. 


4. Report of the investigation into custody 
death should be sent by magistrate to 
National Human Rights Commission as 
early as possible. 

5. The detailed post-mortem should be 
conducted and physical findings should be 
looked for as described in Table 24.1. 

6. Viscera should be preserved in all cases 
preferably. 

7. The police officer is instructed to follow 
instructions as per Table 24.2 to have 
assessment about since death. 


Table 24.1 Instructions to be followed carefully for detention or torture cases 


Torture techniques Physical findings 


Beating 

1. General 

2. On the soles of the feet or fractures of 
the bones of the feet 

3. With the palms on both ears simultaneously 

4. On the abdomen, while lying on a table 
with the upper-half of the body unsupported 
(“Operating table”) 

5. To the head 

Suspension 

6. By the wrist 

7. By the arms or neck 

8. By the ankles 

9. Head down, from a horizontal pole placed 
under the knees with the wrists bound to 
the “Jack” 

Near suffocation 

10. Forced immersion of head, often in 
contaminated liquid (wet submarine) 

11. Tying a plastic bag over the head 
(dry submarine) 

Sexual abuse 

12. Sexual abuse 


Scars, bruises, lacerations, multiple fractures at 
different stages of healing, especially in unusual 
locations, which have not been medically treated. 
Haemorrhage in the soft tissues of the soles of the 
feet and ankles. Aseptic necrosis. 

Ruptured or scarred tympanic membranes. Injuries to 
external ear. 

Bruises on the abdomen. Back injuries. Ruptured 
abdominal viscera. 

Cerebral cortical atrophy. Scars, skull fractures. 
Bruises. 

Bruises or scars about the wrists, joint injuries. 
Bruises or scars at the site of binding. Prominent 
lividity in the lower extremities. 

Bruises or scars about the ankles, joint injuries. 
Bruises or scars on the anterior forearms and back of 
the knees. Marks on the wrists and ankles. 


Faecal material or other debris in the mouth, 
pharynx, trachea, oesophagus. Intrathoracic petechiae. 
Intrathoracic petechiae. 


Sexually transmitted diseases, pregnancy, injuries to 
breast, external genitalia, vagina, anus, rectum. 


Contd. 


CFMT-24 (3rd Proof).p65 


165 


8/14/07, 3:59 PM 























166 Concise Textbook of Forensic Medicine and Toxicology 


Contd. Table 24.1 

Torture techniques Physical findings 


Forced posture 

13. Prolonged standing 

14. Forced straddling of a bar (Saw horse) 

Electric shock 

15. Cattle prod 

16. Wires connected to a source of electricity 

17. Heated metal skewer inserted into the anus 
Miscellaneous 

18. Dehydration 

19. Animal bites 

(Spiders, insects, rats, mice, dogs) 


Dependent oedema. Petechiae in lower extremities. 
Perineal or scrotal haematomas. 

Appearance of burns depends on the age of the 
injury. 

Immediately, spots, vesicles, and/or black exudates, 
macular scars. 

At several months: small, white, reddish or brown 
spots resembling telangiectasias. 

Peri-anal or rectal burns. 

Vitreous humour electrolyte abnormalities. 

Bite marks. 


Table 24.2 Additional inquest procedure CLONING 


In order to help in proper assessment of ‘Time Since Death’, 
determination of temperature changes and development of 
rigor mortis at the time of first examination at the scene is 
essential. This can be attained in the present system of 
inquest by examining the dead body at the scene, 
scientifically for these two parameters either by a medical 
officer or trained police officer. 

Essential requirement for determining temperature 
changes and rigor mortis. 

The procedure is simple and can be learnt by any police 
officer if he is trained properly at the Police Training 
institution by a medical officer. This procedure includes: 

(i) Taking ‘rectal temperature' at the first examination 
of the body at the scene itself while conducting the 
inquest. A simple rectal thermometer can be inserted 
in the anus of the dead body. After waiting for 3 - 
5 minutes temperature should be read. The 
temperature so read should be mentioned in the 
inquest report as also the time of its recording. 

(ii) Similarly, for determining ‘rigor mortis’, i.e. 
stiffening of the muscles, the police officer should 
bend the limbs and see whether there is any stiffness 
in them. The observations about illness should be 
mentioned, as also the time, in the inquest report. 
These observations would be helpful for the doctors 
conducting post-mortem examination. 


Cloning is defined as creation of an organism that 
is an exact genetic copy of the mother. In nature, 
cloning is possible. Identical twins are example of 
natural cloning. Cloning can be done artificially 
through various techniques. 

1. Artificial Embryo Twinning: This 
technology mimics the natural process of 
creating identical twins. In nature, the 
fertilised ovum divides into two-celled 
embryo which separates. Each cell continues 
to divide resulting in two babies inside the 
mother’s uterus. As the two cells come from 
the same zygote, both individuals are 
genetically same. Artificial embryo twinning 
uses the same approach but it is done in vitro 
in a Petri dish. This involves manually 
separating a very early embryo into individual 
cells and then allowing each cell to divide 
and develop on its own. The resulting 
embryos are placed in the womb of a 
surrogate mother where they grow naturally. 
All embryos are genetically same. 


166 


8/14/07, 3:59 PM 


CFMT-24 (3rd Proof).p65 























Miscellaneous Topics 167 


2. Somatic Cell Nuclear Transfer: Somatic 
cell is the normal cell of the body other than 
sperm or egg. Somatic cell has two complete 
sets of chromosomes whereas the germ cells 
(sperm or egg) have only one complete set. 
In this somatic cell nucleus transfer 
technique, first a somatic cell is taken out 
of the body. The nucleus of the cell which 
contain two complete sets of chromosomes 
is taken out. Now, this nucleus is transferred 
into an egg cell from which nucleus has 
already been removed. The reconstructed 
egg cell containing the DNA from a donor 
cell is treated with chemicals or electric 
current to stimulate cell division. Once the 
cell division starts and embryo reaches a 
suitable stage, it is transferred to the uterus 
of a female host where it continues to 
develop until birth. 

The first cloning according to this technique 
was done on sheep at Roslin Institute in 1997 and 
the first clone named ‘Dolly’ was born. It aroused 
worldwide interest and debate on use of cloning in 
human beings. 

Various governments of the world raised a hue 
and cry over human cloning. The United Nations 
has now banned human cloning. The United States 
has banned human cloning in government-run 
research institutions. 

Therapeutic Cloning 

Also called ‘embryo cloning’, it is the production 
of human embryos for use in research. The purpose 
of this technique is not to clone human beings but 
to harvest stem cells that can be used to study 
human development and to treat diseases. Stem 
cells can be used to generate virtually any type of 
specialised cell in the human body. Stem cells are 
extracted from the egg after it has divided for 5 
days. The egg at this stage of development is called 
a ‘blastocyst’. The embryos get destroyed while 


taking out stem cells. So, this process raises a lot 
of ethical issues. It is believed that 1 day stem cells 
would be used in treatment of heart disease, 
diabetes, Alzheimer’s disease, various cancers and 
organ transplants. 

Uses of Cloning Techniques 

Recombinant DNA technology can be used along 
with other related technologies like gene therapy, 
genetic engineering of organisms and sequencing 
genomes. Gene therapy can be used to treat certain 
genetic conditions, by introducing virus vectors that 
carry corrected copies of faulty genes, into the cells 
of a host organism. This technique can be used to 
improve the quality of food crops or animals. 
Reproductive cloning can be used to repopulate 
endangered animals or to improve the quality of 
animals. Therapeutic cloning may provide humans 
an opportunity to produce whole organs from single 
cell. This can be extremely useful in diseases like 
Parkinson’s. 

Risks of Cloning 

Reproductive cloning is very expensive and 
inefficient. Around 90 per cent of attempts fail. It 
is seen that in cloned animals immunity levels are 
down and they have higher rate of infection, 
carcinoma and other disorders. Some cloned 
animals die young. It has been reported that 
genomes of cloned animals are compromised and 
a small percentage behave abnormally. Due to 
programming errors, congenital abnormalities may 
be seen. 

Human cloning: A lot of hue and cry is being 
made on human cloning. Now, the UN General 
Assembly has passed that human cloning should 
not be developed as it raises a lot of ethical and 
social issues. Governments in most of the world 
have already banned human cloning. But some 
private laboratories are still working on it. 


CFMT-24 (3rd Proof).p65 


167 


8/14/07, 3:59 PM 


















168 Concise Textbook of Forensic Medicine and Toxicology 


DNA FINGERPRINTING 
Structure of DNA 

Deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) is the chemical 
structure present in chromosomes. DNA is a double 
helix made of two strands of genetic material spiraled 
around each other. Each strand has a sequences of 
bases. There are four types of bases, namely, adenine, 
guanine, cytosine and thymine. Adenine binds only 
with thymine and guanine binds only with cytosine. 
The two strands of DNA are connected on this basis. 
If the following is one strand, 

A-C-G-A-T-A-A-A 

The complimentary strand would be as follows: 
T-G-C-T-A-T-T-T 

DNA is composed of sugar-phosphate 
backbone to which a sequence of bases is attached. 
A single sugar-phosphate-base unit is called a 
nucleotide. Specific sequence of nucleotides form 
distinct units called ‘genes’. Genes carry our 
heredity material. Each human cell contains 
6 x 10 9 base pairs of DNA. 

DNA Fingerprinting Technique 

The DNA fingerprinting was first developed in 
1985 by Alec Jeffreys. 

Principle 

DNA fingerprinting is based on the principle that, 
with the exception of identical twins, DNA of each 
person is different. The only difference between 
two DNAs is the order of base pairs. We can identify 
each person by the unique base pah sequence which 
he has. Since there are so many million pairs, it 
would be very time consuming if the whole 
sequence is worked out. 

It has been seen that there are repeating patterns 
in DNA, so scientists devised methods to identify 
DNA in a shorter time. The sequences of repeated 
DNA (9-80 base pairs) vary from 1-30 and are 


different in each person. These sequences are 
known as ‘Variable Number of Tandem Repeats 
(VNTRs)’. Within VNTRs, there are sites where a 
restriction enzyme can cut DNA. The location of 
these sites also vary from one individual to another. 
The restriction enzyme cuts the DNA into 
fragments of different lengths. This is called 
‘Restriction Fragment Length Polymorphisms 
(RFLPs)’. On agarose gel, these DNA fragments 
can be separated based on their respective sizes. 

DNA fingerprinting process uses the above 
process and DNA sequences are arranged in order 
of length and then tagged with radioactive probes. 
These emit X-rays and when the sample is 
photographed, it produces a pattern (bands) which 
is unique to each individual. Since these patterns 
are quite characteristic of each person, they are 
called fingerprint and the process is called ‘DNA 
fingerprinting’. 

Laboratory Procedure 

The process of DNA fingerprinting involves 
followings steps: 

1 . Isolation of DNA: This DNA is recovered 
from the tissue. 

2. Cutting, Sizing and Sorting: Restriction 
enzymes are used to cut DNA at specific 
places. The DNA pieces are then transferred 
to nylon sheet by placing the sheet on the 
gel and soaking it overnight. 

3 Probing: Radioactive or coloured probes 
are added to nylon sheet. Multiprobes are 
used to develop pattern, which is as unique 
as a fingerprint. 

The final DNA fingerprint resembles barcodes 
used on books, grocery items. 

PCR (Polymerase Chain Reaction) 

Technique 

This technique is used to amplify the DNA sample 
many times. This helps in producing many copies 
of the sample DNA. This technique is very useful 


CFMT-24 (3rd Proof).p65 


168 


8/14/07, 3:59 PM 


















Miscellaneous Topics 169 


if only a small sample of tissue is available for DNA 
analysis. In this, DNA from even one cell can be 
taken out and copied many times to get good results. 
The technique involves the use of primase and 
polymerase enzymes to produce the copies of DNA. 
The disadvantage of this technique is the risk of 
contamination while multiplying the DNA. 
Nowadays chemiluminescent labelling is preferred 
to radioactive tags. 

Uses of DNA Fingerprinting 

The technique is used for following purposes: 

1 . Disputed Paternity: DNA fingerprinting is 
now widely used in case of disputed 
paternity. The DNA sample of the child is 
compared with that of the alleged father and 
similarities noted. With DNA fingerprinting, 
paternity can be confirmed 100 per cent. 

2. Maternity Testing: DNA fingerprinting is 
used also for maternity testing especially in 
cases where the child is exchanged, 
misplaced, stolen or kidnapped from the 
hospital. 

3. Use in Crime Investigation: DNA 

fingerprinting was used for the first time in 
the identification of a rapist by Alec Jeffreys 
in 1980s. Now, this technique is widely used 
in identification of criminals by analysis of 
semen samples obtained from the vagina of 
victims of rape, blood stain or hair found at 
the scene of crime, or on clothes. 

4. Diagnosis of Inherited Disorders: DNA 
fingerprinting is used in the diagnosis of 
inherited disorders in prenatal and newborn 
babies. Such diseases are cystic fibrosis, 
haemophilia, Huntington’s disease, familial 
Alzheimer’s disease, sickle cell anaemia, 
and thalassaemia. 

5. Developing Treatment of Genetic 
Disorders: Locating genes of genetic 
disorders on chromosomes and studying 
them may help in future in developing 
treatment of genetic disorders. 


6. Migration of Population: DNA 

fingerprinting can be used in determining 
how the races migrated from one region to 
another by comparing the DNA fingerprints. 
It will give us a look into the history of 
settlement of races. 

Collection of Samples for DNA Fingerprinting 

The following samples can be used for DNA 
fingerprinting: 

1. Blood: It is the best sample, and is collected 
by venous or capillary puncture. 10 ml of 
blood can be collected from peripheral vein 
in a bottle containing anti-coagulant EDTA. 
Nowadays, special bags are available which 
are vacuum based. Quantity of blood that 
needs to be collected may vary from 1 to 2 
ml. The blood should be transported to 
laboratory at -20°C under dry ice. 

2. Buccal Epithelial Cells: The cells are 
collected from the inside of the subject’s 
mouth using sterile dry swabs. Two 
samples are taken, one from each cheek. 
The swabs are allowed to dry at room 
temperature. Once these dry, they should 
be packed in separate bottles only then, 
otherwise bacteria present in saliva will 
degrade DNA. 

3. Hair Follicles: 10-15 hairs with roots 
should be pulled from the subject and sealed 
in a sterile bottle. 

Precautions: The buccal swabs should be 
taken only after the subject has rinsed his/her mouth 
with plane water to remove food particles. 

4. Samples from Dead Bodies 

(a) Samples from well preserved dead 
bodies 

(i) Post-mortem blood: 10 ml should be 
drawn in a tube from heart in a bottle 
containing EDTA as an anti¬ 
coagulant. 


CFMT-24 (3rd Proof).p65 


169 


8/14/07, 3:59 PM 


















170 Concise Textbook of Forensic Medicine and Toxicology 


(ii) Skeletal muscle: Two portions of 
skeletal muscle of size about 2 cm 
and weight 10 gm should be taken 
from the most well preserved area. 
Cardiac muscle can also be 
preserved. 

(iii) Teeth: Four teeth, preferably molars, 
can be preserved. 

(b) Samples from charred or semi- 
charred bodies: Where chairing is not 
complete, portions of skeletal muscle 
from deep regions can be preserved. 
Semi-solid blood that remains in cardiac 
cavity can also be preserved. If charring 
is complete, it may not be possible to 
detect DNA. 

(c) Samples from decomposed or 
skeletonised bodies: Decomposed tissue 
can be preserved along with long bones 
like femur, humerus or sternum, which 
contain a lot of bone marrow. Teeth, 
preferably molars, should be preserved. 

Precautions: No preservative should be used 
for any sample except blood. All the samples should 
be preserved in clean and sterile containers with 
proper labelling. The biggest threat is 
contamination with other DNA. 

Samples from Crime Scene 

Seminal stains, salivary stains, debris below 
fingernails and hair can be taken from the crime 
scene and preserved in a similar fashion. The 
samples should be kept in dry ice at -20°C and 
sent to DNA Lab at the earliest. 

EMBALMING 

Definition 

Embalming is defined as the study and science of 
treating a dead body to achieve antiseptic condition, 


a life-like post-mortem appearance and 
preservation. 

History 

Embalming originated in ancient Egypt in about 
3200 B.C. and continued till 650 A.D. Egyptians 
believed that the soul has to pass through several 
life cycles, therefore it is necessary to preserve the 
body so that the soul can return to it. 

Present Use 

In modern times the aim of embalming is to 
preserve dead bodies for dissection in medical 
colleges, transportation of the body to a long 
distance, or waiting for the relatives to come to 
collect the body. 

Principle 

By procedure of embalming, the proteins of the 
body are coagulated, tissues and fixed organs are 
bleached and hardened, and blood is converted 
into brownish mass as a result of the preservatives 
used. 

Preservatives Used 

The most common preservative is formaldehyde. 
It has a very strong, pungent smell and is an irritant. 
In high concentration, it dehydrates the tissues and 
restricts permeability into deeper tissues. It 
produces excessive hardening. Another preservative 
used along with formaldehyde is methyl alcohol, 
which is volatile, inflammable and stabilises the 
formaldehyde. Sometimes phenol is also used. 
Buffers, wetting agents and anticoagulants are also 
used along with preservatives. To produce a 
cosmetic effect simulating natural colour of 
tissues, dyes like eosin, erythrosine acid, fuchsin 
and Toluidine red are used. Water is used as a 


CFMT-24 (3rd Proof).p65 


170 


8/14/07, 3:59 PM 


















Miscellaneous Topics 171 


vehicle to push the ingredients into the body. 
Perfuming agents are also used to mask the 
unpleasant odour. 

Methods of Embalming 

The following are the techniques of embalming 
dead bodies: 

1. Arterial Embalming: Fluid is injected 
through arch of aorta so as to reach all areas 
of the body through arteries. It can be 
injected by (a) gravity method which is very 
time consuming or (b) electric pump method 
through air pressure. About 10 litres of fluid 
is injected. 

2. Cavity Embalming: After arterial injection, 
the thoracic, abdominal and pelvic cavities 
are injected with about 2 litres of fluid to 
detoxicate those materials which cannot be 
aspirated. 

3. Hypodermic Embalming: Subcutaneous 
injection of fluids are given by hypodermic 
syringe with a wide bore needle into isolated 
fragments of the body and limbs. 

4. Surface Embalming: Packs of cotton 
soaked in preservative fluid are applied to 
raw skin, especially in burnt skin or bed 
sores. 

Medico-legal Importance 

The medico-legal importance of embalming is as 
follows: 

1. To carry the dead body in an aeroplane, ship 
or train, embalming is mandatory as per law. 
Certificate of embalming is required from a 
doctor. 

2. Embalming alters the appearance of normal 
tissues and organs, so it is difficult to 
interpret injuries or disease. 


3. Embalming destroys certain poisons like 
alcohol and cyanide present in the body. So, 
toxicological analysis of embalmed body 
may not be accurate. 

WORKMEN’S COMPENSATION ACT, 1923 

The purpose of this act is to provide compensation 
to workers in the event of any injury, disability or 
disease occurring when under employment. This 
Act is called ‘Workmen’s Compensation Act, 
1923’. It extends to the whole of India. The salient 
features of this Act are as follows: 

Definitions 

1. “Commissioner” means a commissioner for 
workmen compensation as appointed by the 
government. 

2. “Compensation” means compensation as 
provided by this Act. 

3. “Dependent” means closest relative of the 
deceased person including wife, children, 
parents or other relations as provided 
under. 

4. “Employer” includes any body of persons 
or any managing agent of the employer. 

5. “Partial disablement” means where the 
disablement is temporary in nature, and it 
reduces the earning capacity of the worker 
in any employment in which he was 
engaged at the time of the accident. 

6. “Total disablement” means such 
disablement, whether temporary or 
permanent in nature, incapacitates a 
workman for all works, which he was 
capable of performing at the time of the 
accident. 

7. “Workman” means any person who is a 
railway servant or employed in as provided 
under Schedule II. 


CFMT-24 (3rd Proof).p65 


171 


8/14/07, 3:59 PM 


















172 Concise Textbook of Forensic Medicine and Toxicology 


Employer’s Liability for Compensation 

If personal injury is caused to a workman by accident 
arising out of and in course of his employment, his 
employer shall be liable to pay compensation. This 
compensation is not payable if partial disablement 
is for less than 30 days; or the accident has been 
caused by workman when he is under the influence 
of alcohol, drugs or wilful disregard to safety norms. 
Compensation is payable if workman contracts some 
occupational disease due to working in that 
atmosphere and peculiar to that employment. List 
of occupational diseases is given in Table 24.3. 

Amount of Compensation 

The amount of compensation is as follows: 

1. Where Death Results from Injury: An 

amount equal to forty per cent of monthly 
wages of the deceased workman multiplied 
by relevant factor or an amount of 
Rs. 20,000/, whichever is more. 

2. Where Permanent Total Disablement 
Results from Injury: An amount equal to 
fifty per cent of monthly wages multiplied 
by relevant factor or an amount of 
Rs. 24,000/, whichever is more. 

Relevant factor: Relevant factor, as mentioned 
above, means the factor specified in Schedule IV 
specifying the number of years which are same as 
completed years of the age of workman on his last 
birthday, immediately preceding the date on which 
compensation fell due (Table 24.4). 

3. Where Permanent Partial Disablement 
Results from Injury: In case of an injury 


specified in Part II of Schedule I, such 
percentage of compensation which would 
be payable in case of permanent total 
disablement as is specified therein as being 
the percentage of the loss of earning 
capacity due to injury. While in the case of 
injury not specified in Schedule I, such 
percentage of the compensation payable in 
the case of permanent total disablement as 
is proportionate to the loss of earning 
capacity as assessed by the doctor who 
examines such a case (Table 24.5). 

4. Where temporary disablement (total or 
partial) results from injury, half monthly 
payment of the sum equivalent to 25 per cent 
of the monthly wages. 

Medical Examination 

Once a workman suffers from an accident, he 
should give notice to the employer. The employer 
can get him medically examined free of cost by a 
qualified medical practitioner to assess the injury 
caused. 

Role of a Commissioner 

All cases under the Workmen’s Compensation Act 
are settled by a commissioner appointed by the 
government. Any worker can approach him for the 
award of compensation in the event of an injury. If 
employer or worker is not satisfied with the 
compensation, he can approach the high court by 
filing appeal against the order. Detailed knowledge 
of the Workmen’s Compensation Act can be 
obtained by referring to this Act in detail. 


CFMT-24 (3rd Proof).p65 


172 


8/14/07, 3:59 PM 


















Miscellaneous Topics 173 


Table 24.3 List of occupational diseases 

[Schedule III] 1 (See Section 3) 

5. No. Occupational diseases Employment 


Part A 

1. Infectious and parasitic diseases contracted 

in an occupation where there is a particular 
risk of contamination. 


2. Diseases caused by work in compressed air. 

3. Diseases caused by lead or its toxic compounds. 

4. Poisoning by nitrous fumes. 

5. Poisoning by organophosphorous compounds. 

Part B 

1. Diseases caused by phosphorus or its toxic 
compounds. 

2. Diseases caused by mercury or its toxic 
compounds. 

3. Diseases caused by benzene or its toxic 
homologues. 

4. Diseases caused by nitro and amido toxic 
derivatives of benzene or its homologues. 

5. Diseases caused by chromium or its toxic 
compounds. 

6. Diseases caused by arsenic or its toxic compounds. 

7. Diseases caused by radioactive substances and 
ionising radiations. 

8. Primary epitheliomatous cancer of the skin caused 
by tar, pitch, bitumen, mineral oil, anthracene, or 
the compounds, products or residues of these 
substances. 

9. Diseases caused by the toxic halogen 
derivatives of hydrocarbons (of the aliphatic 
and aromatic series). 

10. Diseases caused by carbon disulphide. 

11. Occupational cataract due to infra-red radiations. 

12. Diseases caused by manganese or its toxic 
compounds. 


(a) All work involving exposure to health or 
laboratory work. 

(b) All work involving exposure to veterinary work. 

(c) Work relating to handling animals, animal carcasses, 
part of such carcasses, or merchandise which may 
have been contaminated by animals or animal 
carcasses. 

(d) Other work carrying a particular risk of contamination. 

All work involving exposure to the risk concerned. 
All work involving exposure to the risk concerned. 
All work involving exposure to the risk concerned. 
All work involving exposure to the risk concerned. 


All work involving exposure to the risk concerned. 

All work involving exposure to the risk concerned. 

All work involving exposure to the risk concerned. 

All work involving exposure to the risk of concerned. 

All work involving exposure to the risk concerned. 

All work involving exposure to the risk concerned. 
All work involving exposure to the action of 
radioactive substances or ionising radiations. 

All work involving exposure to the risk concerned. 


All work involving exposure to the risk concerned. 

All work involving exposure to the risk concerned. 
All work involving exposure to the risk concerned. 
All work involving exposure to the risk concerned. 


Contd. 


CFMT-24 (3rd Proof).p65 


173 


8/14/07, 3:59 PM 





















174 Concise Textbook of Forensic Medicine and Toxicology 


Contd. Table 24.3 


5. No. Occupational diseases Employment 


All work involving exposure to the risk concerned. 


13. Skin diseases caused by physical, chemical or 
biological agents not included in other items. 

14. Hearing impairment caused by noise. 

15. Poisoning by dinitrophenol or a homologue or by 
substituted dinitrophenol or by the salts of such 
substances. 

16. Disease caused by beryllium or its toxic 
compounds. 

17. Diseases caused by cadmium or its toxic 
compounds. 

18. Occupational asthma caused by recognised 
sensitising agents inherent to the work process. 

19. Diseases caused by fluorine or its toxic 
compounds. 

20. Diseases caused by nitroglycerine or other 
nitro acid esters. 

21. Diseases caused by alcohols and ketones. 

22. Diseases caused by asphyxiants; carbon monoxide, 
and its toxic derivatives, hydrogen sulfide. 

23. Lung cancer and mesotheliomas caused by 
asbestos. 

24. Primary neoplasm of the epithelial lining of the 
urinary bladder or the kidney or the ureter. 

PartC 

1. Pneumoconioses caused by sclerogenic mineral 
dust (silicosis, anthrosilicosis, asbestosis) and 
silico-tuberculosis provided that silicosis is an 
essential factor in causing the resultant incapacity. 

2. Bagassosis. 

3. Bronchopulmonary diseases caused by cotton, 

flax hemp and sisal dust (Byssinosis). 

4. Extrinsic allergic alveolitis caused by 
inhalation of organic dusts. 

5. Bronchopulmonary diseases caused by hard metals. 


All work involving exposure to the risk concerned. 
All work involving exposure to the risk concerned. 

All work involving exposure to the risk concerned. 
All work involving exposure to the risk concerned. 
All work involving exposure to the risk concerned. 
All work involving exposure to the risk concerned. 
All work involving exposure to the risk concerned. 
All work involving exposure to the risk concerned. 
All work involving exposure to the risk concerned. 
All work involving exposure to the risk concerned. 
All work involving exposure to the risk concerned. 

All work involving exposure to the risk concerned. 

All work involving exposure to the risk concerned. 
All work involving exposure to the risk concerned. 

All work involving exposure to the risk concerned. 

All work involving exposure to the risk concerned. 


CFMT-24 (3rd Proof).p65 


174 


8/14/07, 3:59 PM 





















Miscellaneous Topics 175 


Table 24.4 Factors for working out lump sum equivalent of compensation amount in case of permanent disablement 
and death 

[Schedule IV] 1 (See Section 4) 

Completed years of age on the last 
birthday of the workman immediately 
preceding the date on which the 
compensation fell due 

Factors 

Completed years of age on the last 
birthday of the workman immediately 
preceding the date on which the 
compensation fell due 

Factors 

Not more than 16 

228.54 

41 

181.37 

17 

227.49 

42 

178.49 

18 

226.38 

43 

175.54 

19 

225.22 

44 

172.52 

20 

224.00 

45 

169.44 

21 

222.71 

46 

166.29 

22 

221.37 

47 

163.07 

23 

219.95 

48 

159.80 

24 

218.47 

49 

156.47 

25 

216.91 

50 

153.09 

26 

215.28 

51 

149.67 

27 

213.57 

52 

146.20 

28 

211.79 

53 

142.68 

29 

209.92 

54 

139.13 

30 

207.98 

55 

135.56 

31 

205.95 

56 

131.95 

32 

203.85 

57 

128.33 

33 

201.66 

58 

124.70 

34 

199.40 

59 

121.05 

35 

197.06 

60 

117.41 

36 

294.64 

61 

113.77 

37 

192.14 

62 

110.14 

38 

189.56 

63 

106.52 

39 

186.90 

64 

102.93 

40 

184.17 

65 or more 

99.37 


Table 24.5 Percentage of loss of earning capacity 

^Schedule] 1 

5[See Section 2(1) and (4)] 


S. No. 

Description of injury 

Percentage of loss of 
earning capacity 

Part I 6 

List of injuries deemed to result in permanent total disablement 


1 . 

Loss of both hands or amputation at higher sites 

100 

2. 

Loss of both hands and a foot 

100 

3. 

Double amputation through leg or thigh, or amputation through leg 
or thigh on one side and loss of other foot 

100 

4. 

Loss of sight to such an extent as to render the claimant unable to 
perform any work for which eyesight is essential 

100 


Contd. 


CFMT-24 (3rd Proof).p65 


175 


8/14/07, 3:59 PM 



























176 Concise Textbook of Forensic Medicine and Toxicology 


Contd. Table 24.5 


S. No. 

Description of injury 

Percentage of loss of 
earning capacity 

5. 

Very severe facial disfigurement 

100 

6. 

Absolute deafness 

100 

Part II 

List of injuries deemed to result in permanent partial disablement Amputation cases—upper limbs (either arm) 

1 . 

Amputation through shoulder joint 

90 

2. 

Amputation below shoulder with stump less than 8" from tip of acromion 

80 

3. 

Amputation from 8" tip of acromion to less than 4.5" below tip of olecranon 

70 

4. 

Loss of a hand or of the thumb and fingers of one hand and amputation 4W 



below tip of olecranon 

60 

5. 

Loss of thumb 

30 

6. 

Loss of thumb and its metacarpal bone 

40 

7. 

Loss of four fingers of one hand 

50 

8. 

Loss of three fingers of one hand 

30 

9. 

Loss of two fingers of one hand 

20 

10. 

Loss of terminal phalanx of thumb 

20 

Amputation 

cases—lower limbs 


11. 

Amputation of both feet resulting in end bearing stumps 

90 

12. 

Amputation through both feet proximal to the metatarsophalangeal joint 

80 

13. 

Loss of all toes of both feet through the metatarsophalangeal joint 

40 

14. 

Loss of all toes of both feet proximal to the proximal interphalangeal joint 

30 

15. 

Loss of all toes of both feet distal to the proximal interphalangeal joint 

20 

16. 

Amputation at hip 

90 

17. 

Amputation below hip with stump not exceeding 5" in length 



measured from tip of great trochanter 

80 

18. 

Amputation below hip with stump not exceeding 5" in length measured 



from tip of great trochanter but not beyond middle thigh 

70 

19. 

Amputation below middle thigh to 3.5" below knee 

60 

20. 

Amputation below knee with stump exceeding 3.5" but not exceeding 5" 

50 

21. 

Amputation below knee with stump exceeding 5" 

40 

22. 

Amputation of one foot resulting in end bearing 

30 

23. 

Amputation through one foot proximal to the metatarsophalangeal joint 

30 

24. 

Loss of all toes of one foot through the metatarsophalangeal joint 

20 

Other injuries 


25. 

Loss of one eye, without complications, the other being normal 

40 

26. 

Loss of vision of one eye, without complications or disfigurement 


Loss of: 

of eyeball, the other being normal 

30 

Fingers of right or left hand 


Index finget 



27. 

Whole 

14 

28. 

Two phalanges 

11 

29. 

One phalanx 

9 

30. 

Guillotine amputation of tip without loss of bone 

5 


Contd. 


CFMT-24 (3rd Proof).p65 


176 


8/14/07, 3:59 PM 





















Miscellaneous Topics 177 


Contd. Table 24.5 

S. No. 

Description of injury 

Percentage of loss of 
earning capacity 

Middle finger 


31. 

Whole 

12 

32. 

Two phalanges 

9 

31. 

Whole 

12 

32. 

Two phalanges 

9 

33. 

One phalanx 

7 

34. 

Guillotine amputation of tip without loss of bone 

4 

Ring or little finger 


35. 

Whole 

7 

36. 

Two phalanges 

6 

37. 

One phalanx 

5 

38. 

Guillotine amputation of tip without loss of bone 

2 

B. 

Toes of right or left foot 


Great toe 



39. 

Through metatarsophalangeal joint 

14 

40. 

Part, with some loss of bone 

3 

Any other toe 


41. 

Through metatarsophalangeal joint 

3 

42. 

Part, with some loss of bone 

1 

Two toes 

of one foot, excluding great toe 


43. 

Through metatarsophalangeal joint 

5 

44. 

Part, with some loss of bone 

2 

Three toes of one foot, excluding great toe 


45. 

Through metatarsophalangeal joint 

6 

46. 

Part, with some loss of bone 

3 

Four toes 

of one foot, excluding great toe 


47. 

Through metatarsophalangeal joint 

9 

48. 

Part, with some loss of bone 

3 


Note: Complete and permanent loss of the use of any limb or member referred to in this schedule shall be deemed to be 
equivalent of the loss of that limb or member. 


CFMT-24 (3rd Proof).p65 


177 


8/14/07, 3:59 PM 





















CHAPTER 

Law in Relation to Medical 
Practice: Part I 


Doctor-patient relationship is the cornerstone of 
medical practice. It is a very sacred one as it has 
evolved through the ages. In the early ages, a doctor 
was considered equivalent to God and whatever the 
doctor said was considered by patients as law and 
was undisputable. At that time, most medical 
practitioners never charged anything from the patients 
but lived on the voluntary offerings made by them. 
This relationship continued for ages. In modern times, 
when doctors started charging for their professional 
advice, it transformed the doctor-patient relationship. 
Now, the patients have started evaluating the 
professional advice with the money they pay. 

This evaluation has given new meaning to the 
relationship and has made it more responsive on 
behalf of medical practitioners. As of today, the 
doctor-patient relationship is a contractual one 
under the Contract Act and it establishes 
immediately once the patient steps into the clinic 
of the doctor and he agrees to treat him. As we 
understand that the relationship is contractual and 
mutually binding, we have to understand the rights 
and obligations of the doctor and the patient. 

RIGHTS OF THE PATIENT 

Right to Choose a Doctor of His Own Choice 

It is the fundamental right of the patient to choose 
a doctor of his own choice. No patient can be forced 
under law, to visit a particular doctor for advice. 


Although sometimes, the patient may have to 
sacrifice his choice as in the following cases: 

1. If a doctor of his choice is not available at 
that particular time. 

2. If the patient is covered by medical 
insurance or deriving health benefits from 
some organisations like the E.S.I., C.G.H.S., 
etc., he may be asked to go to the doctor on 
the panel of these organisations, otherwise 
he will not be reimbursed the cost of 
professional advice/treatment. If the patient 
is ready to forego the charges he can visit 
the doctor of his own choice. 

3. For recruitment purposes, he may be asked 
to report to a selected board of doctors. 

4. The court may direct a litigant to get his 
medical condition evaluated by a selected 
doctor but cannot force the litigant to receive 
treatment from him. 

5. In case of unconsciousness, any doctor can 
give him treatment with permission taken 
from a relative/attendant or without 
permission if no one is with the patient. 

Right to Information 

The patient has the absolute right to know about 
the disease he is suffering from, how the diagnosis 
is going to be made, how the treatment is planned, 
what type of anaesthesia is to be given, what are 
the choices of treatment available, what are the risks 
involved if there is any alternative treatment 


CFMT-25 (3rd Proof).p65 


178 


8/16/07, 11:08 AM 



















Law in Relation to Medical Practice: Part I 179 


available, and lastly, the prognosis and the cost of 
the treatment. 

Right to Privacy 

The patient enjoys the same rights to privacy as 
are available to other people. While examining, the 
doctor should note that no outsider/undesirable 
persons are present during the examination/ 
treatment. Special care should be taken while 
examining female patients. It is better that 
examination of female patients may be done in the 
presence of a nurse or the attendant of the patient. 

Right to Confidentiality 

All the information arising out of treatment of the 
patient should be kept confidential and should not be 
made public without the written consent of the patient. 

Right to Pictures/Video Recording 

Any pictures or video recording of the patient while 
receiving treatment should be taken only after 
written permission of the patient. Even after 
permission, the identity of the individual should 
be kept a secret and should not be revealed by 
pictures or text accompanying them. 

Right to Change Doctor at Any Stage of 
Treatment 

The patient can change his doctor at any stage of 
the treatment without giving any reason. But when 
he has started taking advice from the second doctor, 
the first doctor would not be responsible for any 
negligence suffered by the patient from the moment 
he had terminated the doctor-patient relationship 
with the first one. 

Right to Grievance Redressal 

The patient has the fundamental right to approach 
the court of law or a consumer forum for any 
grievance against the doctor. He has also the right 
to approach the medical council against ethical 
malpractice of the doctor. 


DUTIES OF THE PATIENT 

These are: 

1. He should cooperate with the doctor by 
giving information about the disease 
process, family and personal history. 

2. He should have faith in the doctor chosen 
by him. 

3. He should regularly follow the advice of the 
doctor. 

4. If he wishes to take a second consultation, 
he should inform the first doctor. 

5. He should not contribute to medical 
negligence. 

6. He should promptly pay the doctor his fee. 

RIGHTS OF THE DOCTOR 

Right to Choose Patients of His Choice 

All the medical practitioners have the fundamental 
right to choose their patients. If somebody has 
started practice, it does not mean that he has to see 
all the patients coming to him for advice. He can 
make a selection out of them. But all medical 
practitioners cannot have their choice of patients 
all the time. In the following situations all doctors 
are bound to treat all. 

Emergency: In life-threatening situations, the 
doctor should not refuse treatment citing his right 
to choose the patient. He should offer emergency 
medical treatment and once the patient has been 
stabilised he can ask the patient to go to a doctor of 
his choice. 

In mass disasters/road traffic accidents: 

Emergency treatment should always be provided 
is cases of disasters and road accidents. If the doctor 
is not following these, action can be taken against 
him by the medical council for violating the code 
of ethics. 

Right to Charge Professional Fee 

Every doctor has the legal right to charge a 
professional fee. It is better that he should display 


CFMT-25 (3rd Proof).p65 


179 


8/16/07, 11:08 AM 


















180 Concise Textbook of Forensic Medicine and Toxicology 


it in his waiting room so that the patient does not 
complain of not noticing it. Although the doctor 
has the right of determining his own professional 
fee, it is desirable that it should not be so high that 
he is out of reach for professional advice for the 
majority of the population. 

Right of Termination of Advice 

As the patient has the right to change the doctor 
so the doctor also has the right to terminate his 
services to the patient if he notices that the patient 
is not following his advice properly or is also 
taking treatment from other doctors without his 
permission. But even in such cases, the doctor 
should not abandon his patient. He should give 
advance notice to the patient that he is terminating 
his professional services due to certain reasons 
and the patient should search for another doctor. 
Till the other doctor has taken charge of the 
patient, he should continue to provide his services 
without fail. 

DUTIES OF THE DOCTOR 

When a doctor develops a relationship with the 
patient, he comes under the following obligations: 

1. He is under the obligation to apply a 
reasonable degree of skill and care. 

2. He is liable for any injury to the patient 
resulting from failure to exercise reasonable 
skill and care. 

3. He should not accept more patients than he 
can handle properly. 

4. He should charge reasonably as agreed upon. 

CONSENT 

Consent is a legal requirement for examination and 
treatment of the patient. The nature of the consent 
varies according to the needs. Failure to obtain 
consent can make physician liable for prosecution 
and damages. Consent may be implied or express. 


Implied Consent 

When a patient has come to a physician for 
treatment and has waited for his turn to come and 
paid the professional fee, he has supposedly 
consented for the treatment. This is called implied 
consent. But this consent is valid only for physical 
examination and not for any procedure. It may be 
noted that this consent is only for inspection, 
palpation, percussion and auscultation. Even in 
these, physician should request the patient’s 
permission to access the body. For vaginal and 
rectal examination express permission is needed. 

Express Consent 

Anything other than implied consent described 
above is express consent. It may be oral or written 
consent. For minor examination like vaginal or 
rectal examination an oral consent is sufficient but 
for procedure, consent should be obtained in 
writing. The oral consent should be obtained in 
the presence of a disinterested person like nurse. 
Although oral consent has the same validity as a 
written consent in the eyes of the law it is easier 
to document written consent and avoid future 
litigations. 

Written consent is a must for all major 
diagnostic and surgical interventions. It should be 
specific for a particular procedure. It should not 
be a “blanket consent.” It has been seen that in 
many nursing homes or small hospitals, a blanket 
consent in the following manner is taken from the 
patient. “I hereby authorise staff of this hospital 
to perform any surgical or anaesthetic procedure 
on me.” 

This sort of blanket consent is invalid in the 
eyes of law. Nowadays, the latest concept of 
informed consent is followed. 

Informed Consent 

Nowadays, more and more patients are getting 
aware of their civil rights and assert the “right to 


CFMT-25 (3rd Proof).p65 


180 


8/16/07, 11:08 AM 


















Law in Relation to Medical Practice: Part I 181 


know.” Informed consent deals with patients’ rights 
and obligations. Patient has the right to know what 
disease he is suffering from and how the diagnosis 
and treatment are planned. He has the right to know 
the potential risks involved and if any alternative 
treatment is also available or not. Patient has also 
the right to know about the approximate cost of 
the treatment. 

The physician should explain all these to the 
patient or his attendant in detail in the patient’s 
language. The signature of the patient or relative 
should be obtained in presence of a disinterested 
third party like an attendant of the patient or a nurse. 
Finally, it should be counter-signed by the physician 
in charge of the patient. A model informed consent 
form is attached and it is recommended to be 
followed. This form is based on the consent form 
used in All India Institute of Medical Sciences 
(AIIMS), New Delhi. 

From Whom is the Consent to be Obtained 

Consent should be obtained from conscious 
mentally sound patient. If a person is unconscious, 
the consent can be obtained from a near relative/ 
friend. If no relative/friend is available then consent 
need not be taken and the physician should proceed 
in good faith. For minors, consent can be obtained 
from parents/guardians or near relatives. A child 
below 12 years cannot give consent. A child above 
12 years but below 18 years can give consent only 
for medical examination but not for any procedure. 
A consent for mentally defective patient can be 
given by a near relative/friend. 

When is Consent not Required 

In following conditions, consent of the patient is 
not required as per law: 

1. When a person is brought for medical 
examination by police, like in cases of 
alcoholic intoxication, sexual assault, etc., 
no consent of the patient is required for 


medical examination but no treatment can 
be enforced without consent of the patient. 

2. In case of an arrested person brought by 
police to take blood sample/sample of hair 
or anything required for evidence, consent 
of the person detained is not necessary and 
even reasonable force can be applied to 
obtain the sample. 

3. Medical examination can be carried out 
without permission of the patient if he has 
been directed by the court. But in case of a 
rape victim, the genitalia examination 
cannot be earned out without the permission 
of the patient in writing. 

4. Consent is not needed for medical 
examination if it is statutory like in armed 
forces, immigration, etc. 

Consent from Spouse to be Taken 

It is advisable to take consent of the spouse in the 
following procedures although in many cases it may 
not be legally necessary: 

1. Termination of pregnancy. 

2. Sterilisation. 

3. Artificial insemination. 

4. Donation of sperms. 

5. Any operation that can have a bearing on 
the sexual rights of the spouse. 

When is Consent not Valid 

In the following cases, consent given is not valid: 

1. Consent given by a mentally unsound 
patient. 

2. Blanket consent. 

3. Consent obtained for a criminal activity like 
criminal abortion, euthanasia or any 
mutilating operation. 

4. When consent is not voluntary and free. 

5. When consent is obtained by force, fear or 
fraud. 


CFMT-25 (3rd Proof).p65 


181 


8/16/07, 11:08 AM 


















182 Concise Textbook of Forensic Medicine and Toxicology 


MODEL INFORMED CONSENT FORM 


Registration No.. 
NAME_ 


.SEX: 


.AGE:. 


SON/DAUGHTER/WIFE OF. 
ADDRESS_ 


Authorisation for Medical Treatment, 
Administration of Anaesthesia and performance of 
Surgical Operation and/or Diagnostic/Therapeutic 
Procedure. 

1. I hereby authorise . 

.(name of hospital) and staff to 

perform upon. 

the following medical treatment, surgical 
operation and/or diagnostic/therapeutic 
procedures. 

2 It has been explained to me that, during the 
course of the operation/procedure, 
unforeseen conditions may be revealed or 
encountered which necessitate surgical or 
other emergency procedures in addition to 
or different from those contemplated at the 
time of initial diagnosis. I, therefore, further 
authorise the above designated staff to 
perform such additional surgical or other 
procedures as they deem necessary or 
desirable. 

3. I consent to the administration of 
anaesthesia and to use such anaesthetics as 
may be deemed necessary or desirable, 
except to the following exceptions: 


(Indicate exception or ‘None’) 

4. I state that I am/am not suffering from 

Hypertension/Diabetes/Bleeding disorders/ 
Eleart diseases or. 

5. I also state that I am not suffering from any 
known allergies or drug reactions. 


6. To the best of my knowledge, I further 
consent to the administration of such drugs, 
infusions, plasma or blood transfusions or 
any other treatment or procedures deemed 
necessary. 

7. The nature and purpose of the operation 
and/or procedures, the necessity thereof, the 
possible alternative methods, treatment, 
prognosis, the risks involved and the 
possibility of complications in the 
investigative procedures/investigations and 
treatment of my condition/diagnosis have 
been fully explained to me and I understand 
the same. 

8. I have been given an opportunity to ask all/ 
any questions and I have also been given 
option to ask for any second opinion. 

9. I acknowledge that no guarantee and 
promises have been made to me concerning 
the result of any procedure/treatment. 

10. I consent to the photographing or televising 
of the operations or procedures to be 
performed, including appropriate portions 
of my body, for medical, scientific or 
educational purposes, provided my identity 
is not revealed by the pictures or by 
descriptive texts accompanying them. 

11. For the purpose of advancing medical 
education, I hereby give consent to the 
admittance of observers to the operating 
room. 

12. I also give consent to the disposal by 
hospital authorities of any deceased tissues 


CFMT-25 (3rd Proof).p65 


182 


8/16/07, 11:08 AM 
































Law in Relation to Medical Practice: Part I 183 


or parts thereof necessary to be removed 
during the course of operative procedure/ 
treatment. 

I CERTIFY THAT THE STATEMENTS 
MADE IN THE ABOVE CONSENT LETTER 
HAVE BEEN READ OVER AND EXPLAINED 
TO ME IN MY MOTHER TONGUE AND I 
HAVE FULLY UNDERSTOOD THE 
IMPLICATIONS OF THE ABOVE CONSENT 
AND FURTHER SUBMIT THAT STATEMENTS 
THEREIN REFERRED TO WERE FILLED IN 
AND ANY INAPPLICABLE PARAGRAPHS 
STRICKEN OFF BEFORE I SIGNED/PUT MY 
THUMB IMPRESSION. 

Signature of the patient/ 
Thumb impression: 
Date: Name: 

Signature, name and address of the witnesses: 

1 . 2 . 


WHEN PATIENT IS A MINOR OR 
UNABLE TO AFFIX SIGNATURE DUE TO 
MENTAL OR PHYSICAL DISABILITY. 

Signature/thumb impression 
of natural guardian/guardian: 
Name and relationship 
with patient: 

Signature: . 

Name: . 

Address of witnesses: 

1 . 2 . 


I CONFIRM THAT I HAVE EXPLAINED THE 
NATURE AND EFFECTS OF THE OPERATION/ 
TREATMENT TO THE PERSON WHO HAS 
SIGNED THE ABOVE CONSENT FORM. 

Signature of Doctor-in-charge 
Name: 

Date: Designation: 


CFMT-25 (3rd Proof).p65 


183 


8/16/07, 11:08 AM 


























184 Concise Textbook of Forensic Medicine and Toxicology 


MEDICAL ETHICS 

Medical ethics may be defined as a code of conduct 
accepted voluntarily by medical practitioners within 
the profession. Legally, they are not enforceable by 
law but are defended by the State Medical Council. 

Medical ethics have evolved through the 
centuries. Some of the ethics have evolved into 
present law, so both the terms, medical ethics and 
medical law, are synonymous. 

Code of Medical Ethics 

The oldest code of medical ethics is the Hippocratic 
Oath. Even after twenty-five centuries, its basic 
principles are still valid and are followed. 

The Charak and the Hippocratic Oath 

In India, Charak was the first physician to start the 
practice of oath many centuries ago. In All India 
Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi, young 
doctors take the Charak Oath before starting 
medical practice and it is administered during the 
convocation when the degree is awarded. 

OATH 

“Not for the self, 

Not for the fulfillment of any worldly material 
desire or gain, 

But solely for the good of suffering humanity, I 
will treat my patient and excel all”. 

— Charak 


The Hippocratic Oath 

‘I swear by Apollo the physician, by 
Aesculapius, Hygieia and Panacea, and I take 
to witness all the Gods, all the Goddesses, to 
keep according to my ability and my judgement 
the following Oath: 

“To consider dear to me as my parents him who 
taught me this art; to live in common with him 
and if necessary to share my goods with him; to 
look upon his children as my own brothers, to 


teach them this art if they so desire without fee 
or written promise; to impart to my sons and the 
sons of the master who taught me and the 
disciples who have enrolled themselves and have 
agreed to the rules of the profession, but to these 
alone, the precepts and the instruction. I will 
prescribe regimen for the good of my patients 
according to my ability and my judgement and 
never do harm to anyone. To please no one will 
I prescribe a deadly drug, nor give advice which 
may cause his death. Nor, will I give a woman a 
pessary to procure abortion. But I will preserve 
the purity of my life and my art. I will not cut for 
stone, even for patients in whom the disease is 
manifest; I will leave this operation to be 
performed by practitioners (specialists in this 
art). In every house where I come I will enter 
only for the good of my patients, keeping myself 
far from all intentional ill-doing and all 
seduction, and especially from the pleasures of 
love with women or with men, be they free or 
slaves. All that may come to my knowledge in 
the exercise of my profession or outside of any 
profession or in daily commerce with men, which 
ought not to be spread abroad. I will keep secret 
and will never reveal. If I keep this oath faithfully, 
may I enjoy my life and practise my art, respected 
by all men and in all times; but if I swerve from 


it or violate it, may the reverse be my lot.” 

During the World War II, gross violation of 
medical ethics was reported. Keeping this in view, 
the World Medical Association was formed at the 
instigation of the British Medical Association. It 
restarted the Hippocratic Oath in a new manner and 
was known as the Declaration of Geneva. 


Declaration of Geneva 

(As amended at Sydney, 1968) 

At the time of being admitted a member of the 
medical profession: 

I will solemnly pledge myself to consecrate my 
life to the service of humanity; 


CFMT-25 (3rd Proof).p65 


184 


8/16/07, 11:08 AM 




























Law in Relation to Medical Practice: Part I 185 


I will give to my teachers the respect and 
gratitude which is their due; 

I will practise my profession with conscience and 
dignity; 

The health of my patient will be my first 
consideration; 

I will respect the secrets which are confided in 
me, even after the patient has died; 

I will maintain by all the means in my power the 
honour and the noble traditions of the medical 
profession; 

My colleagues will be my brothers; I will not 
permit considerations of religion, nationality, 
race, party politics or social standing to intervene 
between my duty and my patient; 

I will maintain the utmost respect for human life 
from the time of conception; even under threat, I 
will not use my medical knowledge contrary to 
the laws of humanity. 

I make these promises solemnly, freely and upon 
my honour. 


Keeping in view the Declaration of Geneva, 
an International Code of Medical Ethics was 
evolved as under: 

International Code of Medical Ethics 

Duties of doctors in general: 

A doctor must always maintain the highest 
standards of professional conduct. 

A doctor must practise his profession 
uninfluenced by motives of profit. 

The following practices are deemed unethical: 

• Any self-advertisement except such as is 
expressly authorised by the national code 
of medical ethics. 

• Collaboration in any form of medical 
service in which the doctor does not have 
professional independence. 

• Receiving any money in connection with 
services rendered to a patient other than a 
proper professional fee, even with the 
knowledge of the patient. 


Any act or advice which could weaken physical 
or mental resistance of a human being may be used 
only in his interest. 

A doctor is advised to use great caution in 
divulging discoveries or new techniques of 
treatment. 

A doctor should certify or testify only to that 
which he has personally verified. 

Duties of Doctors to the Sick 

A doctor must always bear in mind the obligation 
of preserving human life. 

A doctor owes to his patient complete loyalty and 
all the resources of his science. 

Whenever an examination or treatment is beyond 
his capacity he should summon another doctor who 
has the necessary ability. 

A doctor shall preserve absolute secrecy on all he 
knows about his patients because of the confidence 
they have entrusted in him. 

A doctor must give emergency care as a 
humanitarian duty unless he is assured that others 
are willing and will be able to give such care. 

Duties of Doctors to Each Other 

A doctor ought to behave to Iris colleagues as he 
would have them behave to him. A doctor must not 
entice patients from his colleagues. 

A doctor must observe the principles of “The 
Declaration of Geneva’ approved by the World 
Medical Association. During Second World War, 
unethical human experimentation was carried out 
extensively. World Medical Association in 1964 
drew a code of conduct for doctors intending to 
start experimental treatment. This code is known 
as Declaration of Helsinki. 

Declaration of Helsinki 

(Revised 1975) 

Recommendations guiding medical doctors in 
biomedical research involving human subjects. 


CFMT-25 (3rd Proof).p65 


185 


8/16/07, 11:08 AM 





















186 Concise Textbook of Forensic Medicine and Toxicology 


Introduction 

It is the mission of the medical doctor to safeguard 
the health of the people. His or her knowledge and 
conscience are dedicated to the fulfillment of this 
mission. The Declaration of Geneva of the World 
Medical Association binds the doctor with the 
words: “The health of my patient will be my first 
consideration”, and the International Code of 
Medical Ethics declares that, “Any act or advice 
which could weaken physical or mental resistance 
of a human being may be used only in his interest.” 

The purpose of biomedical research involving 
human subjects must be to improve diagnostic, 
therapeutic and prophylactic procedures; and the 
understanding of the aetiology and pathogenesis 
of the disease. 

In current medical practice most diagnostic, 
therapeutic or prophylactic procedures involve 
hazards. This applies a fortiori to biomedical research. 

Medical progress is based on research which 
ultimately must rest in part on experimentation 
involving human subjects. In the field of biomedical 
research a fundamental distinction must be 
recognised between medical research in which the 
aim is essentially diagnostic or therapeutic for a 
patient and medical research, in which essential 
objective is purely scientific and without direct 
diagnostic or therapeutic value to the person 
subjected to the research. 

Special caution must be exercised in the 
conduct of research which may affect the 
environment, and the welfare of animals used for 
research must be respected. 

Because it is essential that the results of 
laboratory experiments be applied to human beings 
to further scientific knowledge and to help suffering 
humanity, the World Medical Association has 
prepared the following recommendations as a guide 
to every doctor in biomedical research involving 
human subjects. 

They should be kept under review in the future. 
It must be stressed that the standards as drafted are 
only a guide to physicians all over the world. Doctors 
are not relieved from criminal, civil and ethical 
responsibilities under the laws of their own countries. 


Basic Principles 

1. Biomedical research involving human 
subjects must conform to generally accepted 
scientific principles and should be based on 
adequately performed laboratory and animal 
experimentation and on a thorough 
knowledge of the scientific tradition. 

2. The design and performance of each 
experimental procedure involving human 
subjects should be clearly formulated in an 
experimental protocol, which should be 
transmitted to a specially appointed 
independent committee for consideration, 
comment and guidance. 

3. Biomedical research involving human 
subjects should be conducted only by 
scientifically qualified persons and under the 
supervision of a clinically competent 
medical person. The responsibility for the 
human subject must always rest with a 
medically qualified person and never rest 
on the subject of the research, even though 
the subject has given his/her consent. 

4. Biomedical research involving human 
subjects cannot legitimately be carried out 
unless the importance of the objective is in 
proportion to the inherent risk to the subject. 

5. Every biomedical research project involving 
human subjects should be preceded by 
careful assessment of predictable risks in 
comparison with foreseeable benefits to the 
subject or to others. Concern for the interests 
of the subject must always prevail over the 
interest of science and society. 

6. The right of the research subject to 
safeguard his or her integrity must always 
be respected. Every precaution should be 
taken to respect the privacy of the subject 
and to minimise the impact of the study on 
the subject’s physical and mental integrity 
and on the personality of the subject. 

7. Doctors should abstain from engaging in 
research projects involving human subjects 


CFMT-25 (3rd Proof).p65 


186 


8/16/07, 11:08 AM 


















Law in Relation to Medical Practice: Part I 187 


unless they are satisfied that the hazards 
involved are believed to be predictable. 
Doctors should cease any investigation if 
the hazards are found to outweigh the 
potential benefits. 

8. In publication of the results of his or her 
research, the doctor is obliged to preserve 
the accuracy of the results. Reports of 
experimentation which are not in 
accordance with the principles laid down 
in this declaration should not be accepted 
for publication. 

9. In any research on human beings, each 
potential subject must be adequately 
informed of the aims, methods, anticipated 
benefits and potential hazards of the study 
and the discomfort it may entail. He or she 
should be informed that he or she is at liberty 
to abstain from participation in the study and 
that he or she is free to withdraw his or her 
consent to participation at any time. The 
doctor should then obtain the subject’s 
freely given informed consent, preferably 
in writing. 

10. When obtaining informed consent for the 
research project the doctor should be 
particularly cautious if the subject is in an 
independent relationship with him or her or 
may consent under duress. In that case the 
informed consent should be obtained by a 
doctor who is not engaged in investigation 
and who is completely independent of this 
official relationship. 

11. In case of legal incompetence, informed 
consent should be obtained from the legal 
guardian in accordance with national 
legislation. Where physical or mental 
incapacity makes it impossible to obtain 
informed consent, or when the subject is a 
minor, permission from the responsible 
relative replaces that of the subject in 
accordance with national legislation. 

12. The research protocol should always contain 
a statement of the ethical considerations 


involved and should indicate that the 
principles enunciated in the present 
declaration are complied with. 

Medical Research Combined with 
Professional Care (Clinical Research) 

1. In the treatment of a sick person, the doctor 
must be free to use a new diagnostic and 
therapeutic measure, if in his or her 
judgement it offers hope of saving life, re¬ 
establishing health or alleviating suffering. 

2. The potential benefits, hazards and 
discomfort of a new method should be 
weighed against the advantages of the best 
current diagnostic and therapeutic methods. 

3. In any medical study, every patient including 
those of a control group, be assured of the 
best proven diagnostic and therapeutic 
method. 

4. The refusal of the patient to participate in a 
study must never interfere with the doctor- 
patient relationship. 

5. If the doctor considers it essential not to 
obtain informed consent, the specific 
reasons for this proposal should be stated in 
the experimental protocol for transmission 
to the independent committee. 

6. The doctor can combine medical research 
with professional care, the objective being 
the acquisition of new medical knowledge, 
only to the extent that medical research is 
justified by its potential diagnostic or 
therapeutic value for the patient. 

Non-therapeutic Biomedical Research 
Involving Human Subjects (Non-clinical 
Biomedical Research) 

1. In the purely scientific application of 
medical research carried out on a human 
being, it is the duty of the doctor to remain 
the protector of the life and health of that 
person on whom biomedical research is 
carried out. 


CFMT-25 (3rd Proof).p65 


187 


8/16/07, 11:08 AM 


















188 Concise Textbook of Forensic Medicine and Toxicology 


2. The subjects should be volunteers either 
healthy persons or patients for whom the 
experimental design is not related to the 
patient’s illness. 

3. The investigator or the investigating team 
should discontinue the research if in his/her 
or their judgement it may, if continued, be 
harmful to the individual. 

4. In research on man, the interest of science 
and society should never take precedence 
over considerations related to the well-being 
of the subject. 

Professional Secrecy 

Secrecy is an important component of medical 
ethics. Whatever information physician has 
received during treatment should be kept 
confidential. It should not be divulged without the 
written permission of the patient. Failure to keep 
secrecy can lead the doctor into litigation. 

Confidentiality of Medical Records 

It is the duty of the doctor to keep all the medical 
records confidential that have originated during 
treatment. They can be made public only by the 
written permission of the patient. However, if 
directed by a court of law, they can be produced. 
Police has the power to seize medical records if 
some negligence is suspected. For academic benefit, 
the medical records can be used but the identity of 
the patient must be kept secret and should not be 
revealed by pictures or text. However, with the 
permission of the patient identity can be revealed. 

Ethical Relations with Fellow-colleagues 

Great care should be taken while dealing with 
fellow-colleagues and the following principles 
should be observed: 

• Hold your fellow-colleagues as your 
brothers. 

• Do not criticise your colleague in the 
presence of a patient. 


• If difference of opinion is there, talk to him 
directly and not through the patients. 

• Do not entice the patients from your 
colleagues. 

• If your colleague has sent some patients to 
you for consultation, send the patient back 
to him after you have done your due. 

• Do not involve in fee splitting with your 
colleagues. 

• If possible, an assistant should not open 
practice in the same area where his senior 
is practising. 

MEDICAL COUNCIL 

In order to regulate medical practice in India, in 
1916, “Indian Medical Degrees Act” was 
introduced which recognised medical degrees to 
practice medicine. In 1933, Indian Medical Council 
Act 1933 was passed to safeguard the status of 
various medical degrees awarded by Indian 
universities. It also envisaged to maintain uniform 
standard of medical education in the country. Indian 
Medical Act, 1956 was enacted and Act of 1933 
was repealed. The Act of 1956 introduced: 

(a) Recognition for representation of the lice¬ 
ntiate medical practitioners. 

(b) Provision for registration of foreign medical 
qualifications. 

(c) Provision for formation of a committee to 
reorganise postgraduate medical education 
in the country. 

(d) Maintenance of medical register containing 
names of medical practitioners in India. 

In 1964, this Act was amended to constitute 
Medical Council of India and reorganise medical 
education in India. 

Now, in each state there is a state medical 
council functioning and exercising control over all 
medical practitioners working in the state. In New 
Delhi, Medical Council of India exercises control 
over all state medical councils. 


CFMT-25 (3rd Proof).p65 


188 


8/16/07, 11:08 AM 


















Law in Relation to Medical Practice: Part I 189 


Functions of Medical Council of India 

The following are the main functions of the Medical 
Council of India. 

1. Maintenance of Indian medical register 
where names of all medical practitioners 
working in India are registered. 

2. Granting permission for establishment of 
new medical colleges and new courses of 
study. 

3. Derecognition of any medical college or any 
course if found substandard. 

4. Maintenance of standard of medical 
education in the country. 

5. Recognition of medical qualifications 
granted by foreign medical universities. 

6. Maintenance of standards of medical 
examination in various undergraduate and 
postgraduate courses. 

7. Regulation of professional conduct and 
prescribe standards of professional conduct 
and etiquette, and a code for medical 
practitioner. 

8. Removal of names from Indian Medical 
Register if a medical practitioner is found 
guilty. 

Warning Notice 

Once Medical Council of India receives a complaint 
against a medical practitioner about breach of 
professional conduct, it may issue a warning notice 
to him. It directs him to explain his conduct before 
an ethical committee. 

If ethical committee finds him guilty, it can 
recommend: 

(a) Erasure of name of the medical practitioner 
for some time from Indian Medical Register. 

(b) Permanent erasure of name of the medical 
practitioner from Indian Medical Register. 
If name is removed permanently, it is called 
“Professional Death Sentence.” 

Infamous Conduct 

When a medical practitioner acts in a disgraceful 


or dishonourable manner, it is called ‘infamous 
conduct’ or ‘professional misconduct’. Medical 
Council of India has prescribed Indian Medical 
Council professional conduct and ethics regulations 
which every medical practitioner is suppose to 
follow by his heart and deeds. 

The following are the examples of professional 
misconducts. 

1. Non-maintenance of medical records of 
indoor patients for 3 years or refusal to 
provide such records to patient in 72 hours. 

2. Non-display of registration number in clinic, 
prescription and certificates issued by him. 

3. Adultery or improper conduct with a patient. 

4. Conviction by a court of law for offences 
involving moral turpitudes/criminal act. 

5. Conducting sex determination tests with an 
intention to terminate life of female foetus. 

6. Signing of fake medical certificates. 

7. Violating provisions of Drugs and 
Cosmetics Act. 

8. Association with unqualified persons in 
discharge of medical practice. 

9. Performing a criminal abortion. 

10. Advertising himself except as provided 
under rules. 

11. Revealing professional secrets of the patient 
except as provided under rules. 

12. Refusal of treatment on religious grounds. 

13. Informed consent not taken. 

14. Should not publish photographs of patient 
without consent. 

15. Dichotomy or sharing of professional fees 
with fellow practitioners. 

16. Use of touts or agents for procuring patients. 

17. Doing illegal in vitro fertilisation without 
informed consent of the patient and her 
spouse as well as the donor. 

18. Absence from duty. 

19. Violation of research guidelines. 

The details of above misconducts are provided 
later in this chapter in Indian Medical Council 
(Professional Conduct and Ethics) Regulation, 2002. 


CFMT-25 (3rd Proof).p65 


189 


8/16/07, 11:08 AM 


















190 Concise Textbook of Forensic Medicine and Toxicology 


The Indian Medical Council of India Act, 1956 
is here given in detail to understand composition, 
functions and powers of the Medical Council of 
India. 

MEDICAL COUNCIL OF INDIA 

An act to provide for the reconstitution of the 
Medical Council of India, and the maintenance of 
a Medical Register for India and for matters 
connected therewith. 


(30th December, 1956) 
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventh Year 
of the Republic of India as follows: 


1. Short Title, Extent and Commencement: 

(1) This Act may be called the Indian 
Medical Council Act, 1956. 

(2) It extends to the whole of India. 

(3) It shall come into force on such date as 
the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, 
appoint. 

2. Definitions: In this Act, unless the context 
otherwise requires: 

(a) “approved institution” means a hospital, 
health centre or other such institution 
recognised by a University as an institution 
in which a person may undergo the training, 
if any, required by his course of study before 
the award of any medical qualification to 
him; 

(b) “council” means the Medical Council of 
India constituted under this Act; 

(c) “Indian Medical Register” means the 
medical register maintained by the Council; 

(d) “Medical institution” means any institution, 
within or outside India, which grants 
degrees, diplomas or licences in medicine; 

(e) “medicine” means modern scientific 
medicine in all its branches and includes 
surgery and obstetrics, but does not include 
veterinary medicine and surgery; 


(f) “prescribed” means prescribed by 
regulations; 

(g) “recognised medical qualification” means 
any of the medical qualifications included 
in the schedules; 

(h) “regulation” means a regulation made under 
Section 33; 

(i) “State Medical Council” means a medical 
council constituted under any law for the 
time being in force in any State regulating 
the registration of practitioners of medicine; 

(j) “State Medical Register” means a register 
maintained under any law for the time being 
in force in any State regulating the 
registration of practitioners of medicine; 

(k) “University” means any university in India 
established by law and having a medical 
faculty. 

3. Constitution and Composition of the 

Council: 

(l) The Central Government shall cause to be 
constituted a Council consisting of the 
following members, namely: 

(a) one member from each State other than 
a Union Territory, to be nominated by 
the Central Government in consultation 
with the State Government concerned; 

(b) one member from each University, to be 
elected from amongst the members of 
the medical faculty of the University by 
members of the Senate of the University 
or, in case the University has no Senate, 
by members of the Court. 

(c) one member from each State in which a 
State Medical Register is maintained, to 
be elected from amongst themselves by 
persons enrolled on such Register who 
possess the medical qualifications 
included in the First or the Second 
Schedule or in Part II of the Third 
Schedule. 

(d) seven members to be elected from 
amongst themselves by persons enrolled 


CFMT-25 (3rd Proof).p65 


190 


8/16/07, 11:08 AM 



















Law in Relation to Medical Practice: Part I 191 


on any of the State Medical Registers 
who possess the medical qualifications 
included in Part I of the Third Schedule, 
(e) eight members to be nominated by the 
Central Government. 

2. The President and Vice-president of the 
Council shall be elected by the members 
of the Council from amongst 
themselves. 

3. No act, done by the Council shall be 
questioned on the ground merely of the 
existence of any vacancy in, or any 
defect in the constitution of the Council. 

4. Mode of Election: 

1. An election under clause (b), clause (c) or 
clause (d) of sub-section (1) of Section 3 
shall be conducted by the Central 
Government in accordance with such rules 
as may be made by it in this behalf, and any 
rules so made may provide that pending the 
preparation of the Indian Medical Register 
in accordance with the provisions of this 
Act. the members referred to in clause (d) 
of sub-section (1) of Section 3 may be 
nominated by the Central Government 
instead of being elected as provided therein. 

2. Where any dispute arises regarding any 
election to the Council, it shall be referred 
to the Central Government whose decision 
shall be final. 

5. Restrictions on Nomination and 
Membership: 

1. No person shall be eligible for 
nomination under clause (a) of sub¬ 
section (1) of Section 3 unless he 
possesses any of the medical 
qualifications included in the First and 
Second Schedules, resides in the State 
concerned, and, where a State Medical 
Register is maintained in that State is 
enrolled on that register. 

2. No person may at the same time serve 
as a member in more than one capacity. 


6. Incorporation of the Council: The Council 
so constituted shall be a body corporate by 
the name of the Medical Council of India, 
having perpetual succession and a common 
seal, with power to acquire and hold 
property, both movable and immovable, and 
to contract, and shall by the said name sue 
and be sued. 

7. Term of Office of President, Vice- 
President and Members: 

1. The President or Vice-President of the 
council shall hold office for a term not 
exceeding five years, and not extending 
beyond the expiry of his term as member 
of the Council. 

2. Subject to the provisions of this Section, 
a member shall hold office for a term of 
five years from the date of his 
nomination or election or until his 
successor shall have been duly 
nominated or elected, whichever is 
longer. 

3. An elected or nominated member shall 
be deemed to have vacated his seat if he 
is absent without excuse, sufficient in 
the opinion of the Council, from three 
consecutive ordinary meetings of the 
Council or, in the case of a member 
elected under clause (b) of subsection 
(1) of Section 3, if he ceases to be a 
member of the medical faculty of the 
University concerned, or in the case of 
a member elected under clause (c) or 
clause (d) of that sub-section, if he 
ceases to be a person enrolled on the 
State Medical Register concerned. 

4. A casual vacancy in the Council shall 
be filled by nomination or election, as 
the case may be, and the person 
nominated or elected to fill the vacancy 
shall hold office only for the remainder 
of the term for which the member whose 
place he takes was nominated or elected. 

5. Members of the Council shall be eligible 
for re-nomination or re-election. 


CFMT-25 (3rd Proof).p65 


191 


8/16/07, 11:08 AM 


















192 Concise Textbook of Forensic Medicine and Toxicology 


6. Where the said term of five years is 
about to expire in respect of any 
member, a successor may be nominated 
or elected at any time within three 
months before the said term expires but 
he shall not assume office until the said 
term has expired. 

8. Meetings of the Council 

1. The Council shall meet at least once in 
each year at such time and place as may 
be appointed by the Council. 

2. Unless otherwise provided by 
regulations, fifteen members of the 
Council shall form a quorum, and all the 
acts of the Council shall be decided by 
a majority of the members present and 
voting. 

9. Officers, Committees and Servants of the 
Council: The Council shall: 

1. Constitute from amongst its members an 
Executive Committee and such other 
Committees for general or special putposes 
as the Council deems necessary to carry out 
the purposes of this Act; 

2. Appoint a Registrar who shall act as 
Secretary and who may also, if deemed 
expedient, act as Treasurer; 

3. Employ such other persons as the Council 
deems necessary to carry out the purposes 
of this Act; 

4. Require and take from the Registrar, or from 
any other employee, such security for the 
due performance of his duties as the Council 
deems necessary; and 

5. With the previous sanction of the Central 
Government, fix the remuneration and 
allowances to be paid to the President, Vice- 
President and member of the Council and 
determine the conditions of service of the 
employees of the Council. 

10. The Executive Committee: 

1. The Executive Committee, hereinafter 
referred to as the Committee, shall consist 


of the President and Vice-President, who 
shall be members ex officio, and not less than 
seven and not more than ten members who 
shall be elected by the Council from 
amongst its members. 

2. The President and Vice-President shall be 
the President and Vice-President, 
respectively, of the Committee. 

3. In addition to the powers and duties 
conferred and imposed upon it by this Act, 
the Committee shall exercise and discharge 
such powers and duties as the Council may 
confer or impose upon it by any regulations 
which may be made in this behalf. 

10A. Permission for Establishment of New 
Medical College, New Course of Study, 
etc. 

1. Notwithstanding anything contained in this 
Act or any other law for the time being in 
force: 

(a) no person shall establish a medical 
college, or 

(b) no medical college shall 

(i) open a new or higher course of 
study or training (including a 
postgraduate course of study or 
training) which would enable a 
student of such course or training 
to qualify himself for the award 
of any recognised medical 
qualification; or 

(ii) increase its admission capacity in 
any course of study or training 
(including a postgraduate course 
of study or training), except with 
the previous permission of the 
Central Government obtained in 
accordance with the provisions of 
this section. 

Explanation 1-For the pur¬ 
poses of this section, “person” 
includes any university or a trust 
but does not include the Central 
Government. 


CFMT-25 (3rd Proof).p65 


192 


8/16/07, 11:08 AM 


















Law in Relation to Medical Practice: Part I 193 


Explanation 2-For the 
purposes of this section, 
“admission capacity” in relation to 
any course of study or training 
(including postgraduate, course of 
study or training) in a medical 
college, means the maximum 
number of students that may be 
fixed by the Council from time to 
time for being admitted to such 
course or training. 

2. (a) Every person or medical college shall for 

the purpose of obtaining permission under 
sub-section (1), submit to Central 
Government a scheme in accordance with 
the provisions of clause (b) and the Central 
Government shall refer the scheme to the 
Council for its recommendations. 

(b) The scheme referred to in clause (a) shall 
be in such form and contain such 
particulars and be preferred in such 
manner and be accompanied with such 
fee as may be prescribed. 

3. On receipt of a scheme by the Council under 
sub-section (2), the Council may obtain such 
other particulars as may be considered 
necessary by it from the person or the medical 
college concerned, and thereafter, it may 

(a) if the scheme is defective and does not 
contain any necessary particulars, give 
a reasonable opportunity to the person 
or college concerned for making a 
written representation and it shall be 
open to such person or medical college 
to rectify the defects, if any, specified 
by the Council; 

(b) consider the scheme, having regard to 
the factors referred to in sub-section (7), 
and submit the scheme together with the 
recommendations thereon to the Central 
Government. 

4. The Central Government may after 
considering the scheme and the 


recommendations of the Council under sub¬ 
section (3) and after obtaining, where 
necessary, such other particulars as may be 
considered necessary by it from the person 
or college concerned, and having regard to 
the factors referred to in sub-section (7), 
either approve (with such conditions, if any, 
as it may consider necessary) or disapprove 
the scheme and any such approval shall be 
a permission under sub-section (1): 

Provided that no scheme shall be 
disapproved by the Central Government 
except after giving the person or college 
concerned a reasonable opportunity of 
being heard; 

Provided further that nothing in this 
sub-section shall prevent any person or 
medical college whose scheme has not 
been approved by the Central 
Government to submit a fresh scheme 
and the provisions of this section shall 
apply to such scheme, as if such scheme 
has been submitted for the first time 
under sub-section (1). 

5. Where, within a period of one year from 
the date of submission of the scheme to the 
Central Government under sub-section (1), 
no order passed by the Central Government 
has been communicated to the person or 
college submitting the scheme, such scheme 
shall be deemed to have been approved by 
the Central Government in the form in 
which it had been submitted, and 
accordingly, the permission of the Central 
Government required under sub-section (1) 
shall also be deemed to have been granted. 

6. In computing the time-limit specified in sub¬ 
section (5), the time taken by the person or 
college concerned submitting the scheme, 
in furnishing any particulars called for by 
the Council, or by the Central Government, 
shall be excluded. 


CFMT-25 (3rd Proof).p65 


193 


8/16/07, 11:08 AM 


















194 Concise Textbook of Forensic Medicine and Toxicology 


7. The Council, while making its 
recommendations under clause (b) of sub¬ 
section (3) and the Central Government, 
while passing an order, either approving or 
disapproving the scheme under sub-section 
(4) shall have due regard to the following 
factors, namely: 

(a) whether the proposed medical college 
or the existing medical college seeking 
to open a new or higher course of study 
or training, would be in a position to 
offer the minimum standards of medical 
education as prescribed by the Council 
under Section 19A or, as the case may 
be, under Section 20 in the case of 
postgraduate medical education; 

(b) whether the person seeking to establish 
a medical college or the existing medical 
college seeking to open a new or higher 
course of study or training or to increase 
its admission capacity has adequate 
financial resources; 

(c) whether necessary facilities in respect 
of staff, equipment, accommodation, 
training and other facilities to ensure 
proper functioning of the medical 
college or conducting the new course of 
study or training or accommodating the 
increased admission capacity have been 
provided or would be provided within 
the time limit specified in the scheme; 

(d) whether adequate hospital facilities, 
having regard to the number of students 
likely to attend such medical college or 
course of study or training or as a result 
of the increased admission capacity have 
been provided or would be provided 
within the time limit specified in the 
scheme; 

(e) whether any arrangement has been made 
or programme drawn to impart proper 
training to students likely to attend such 
medical college or course of study or 
training by persons having the 
recognised medical qualifications; 


(f) the requirement of manpower in the field 
of practice of medicine; and 

(g) any other factors as may be prescribed. 

8. Where the Central Government passes an 
order either approving or disapproving a 
scheme under this section, a copy of the 
order shall be communicated to the person 
or college concerned. 

10B. Non-recognition of Medical Qualifications 
in Certain Cases: 

1. Where any medical college is established 
except with the previous permission of the 
Central Government in accordance with the 
provisions of Section 10A, no medical 
qualification granted to any student of such 
medical college shall be a recognised 
medical qualification for the purposes of this 
Act. 

2. Where any medical college opens a new or 
higher course of study or training (including 
a postgraduate course of study or training) 
except with the previous permission of the 
Central Government in accordance with the 
provisions of Section 10A, no medical 
qualification granted to any student of such 
medical college on the basis of such study 
or training shall be a recognised medical 
qualification for the purposes of this Act. 

3. Where any medical college increases its 
admission capacity in any course of study 
or training except with the previous 
permission of the Central Government in 
accordance with the provisions of Section 
10A, no medical qualification granted to any 
student of such medical college on the basis 
of the increase in its admission capacity shall 
be a recognised medical qualification for the 
purposes of this Act. 

Explanation - For the purposes of this section, 
the certificate for identifying a student who has been 
granted a medical qualification on the basis of such 
increase in the admission capacity shall be such as 
may be prescribed. 


CFMT-25 (3rd Proof).p65 


194 


8/16/07, 11:08 AM 


















Law in Relation to Medical Practice: Part I 195 


IOC. Time for Seeking Permission for Certain 
Existing Medical Colleges, etc.: 

1. If, after the 1st day of June, 1992 and on 
and before the commencement of the Indian 
Medical Council (Amendment) Act, 1993 
any person has established a medical college 
or any medical college has opened a new or 
higher course of study or training or 
increased the admission capacity, such 
person or medical college, as the case may 
be, shall seek, within a period of one year 
from the commencement of the Indian 
Medical Council (Amendment) Act, 1993, 
the permission of the Central Government 
in accordance with the provisions of Section 
10A. 

2. If any person or medical college, as the case 
may be fails to seek the permission under 
sub-section (1), the provisions of Section 
10B shall apply, so far as may be as if, 
permission of the Central Government 
under Section 10A has been refused. 

11. Recognition of Medical Qualification 

granted by Universities or Medical 

Institutions in India: 

1. The medical qualifications granted by any 
university or medical institution in India 
which are included in the First Schedule 
shall be recognised medical qualifications 
for the purposes of this Act. 

2. Any university or medical institution in 
India which grants a medical qualification 
not included in the First Schedule may apply 
to the Central Government to have such 
qualification recognised, and the Central 
Government, after consulting the Council, 
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
amend the First Schedule so as to include 
such qualifications therein, and any such 
notification may also direct that an entry 
shall be made in the last column of the First 
Schedule against such medical qualification 
declaring that it shall be a recognised 
medical qualification only when granted 
after a specified date. 


12. Recognition of Medical Qualifications 

Granted by Medical Institutions in 

Countries with which there is a Scheme of 

Reciprocity: 

1. The medical qualifications granted by 
medical institutions outside India which are 
included in the Second Schedule shall be 
recognised medical qualifications for the 
purposes of this Act. 

2. The Council may enter into negotiations 
with the Authority in any country outside 
India which by the law of such country is 
entrusted with the maintenance of a register 
of medical practitioners, for the settling of 
a scheme of reciprocity for the recognition 
of medical qualifications, and in pursuance 
of any such scheme, the Central 
Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, amend the Second 
Schedule so as to include therein the 
medical qualification which the Council has 
decided should be recognised, and any such 
notification may also direct that an entry 
shall be made in the last column of the 
Second Schedule against such medical 
qualification declaring that it shall be a 
recognised medical qualification only when 
granted after a specified date. 

3. The Central Government, after consultation 
with the Council, may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, amend the Second 
Schedule by directing that an entry be made 
therein in respect of any medical 
qualification declaring that it shall be a 
recognised medical qualification only when 
granted before a specified date. 

4. Where the Council has refused to 
recommend any medical qualification which 
has been proposed for recognition by any 
Authority referred to in sub-section (2) and 
that Authority applies to the Central 
Government in this behalf, the Central 
Government, after considering such 
application and after obtaining from the 
council a report, if any, as to the reasons for 


CFMT-25 (3rd Proof).p65 


195 


8/16/07, 11:08 AM 


















196 Concise Textbook of Forensic Medicine and Toxicology 


any such refusal, may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, amend the Second 
Schedule so as to include such qualification 
therein and the provisions of sub-section (2) 
shall apply to such notification. 

13. Recognition of Medical Qualifications 
Granted by Certain Medical Institutions 
whose Qualifications are Not Included in the 
First or Second Schedule: 

1. The medical qualifications granted by 
medical institutions in India which are not 
included in the First Schedule and which 
are included in Part I of the Third Schedule 
shall also be recognised medical 
qualifications for the purposes of this Act. 

2. The medical qualifications granted to a 
citizen of India: 

(a) before the 15th day of August, 1947, by 
medical institutions in the territories now 
forming part of Pakistan, and, 

(b) before the 1st day of April, 1937, by 
medical institutions in the territories now 
forming part of Burma, which are 
included in Part I of the Third Schedule 
shall also be recognised medical 
qualifications for the purposes of this 
Act. 

3. The medical qualifications granted by 
medical institutions outside India which are 
included in Part II of the Third Schedule 
shall also be recognised medical 
qualifications for the purposes of this Act, 
but no person possessing any such 
qualification shall be entitled to enrolment 
on any State Medical Register unless he is 
a citizen of India and has undergone such 
practical training after obtaining that 
qualification as may be required by the rules 
or regulations in force in the country 
granting the qualification, or if he has not 
undergone any practical training in that 


country he has undergone such practical 
training as may be prescribed. 

4. The Central Government, after consulting 
the Council, may by notification in the 
Official Gazette, amend Part II of the Third 
Schedule so as to include therein any 
qualification granted by a medical institution 
outside India, which is not included in the 
Second Schedule. 

5. Any medical institution in India which is 
desirous of getting a medical qualification 
granted by it included in Part I of the Third 
Schedule may apply to the Central 
Government to have such qualification 
recognised and the Central Government, 
after consulting the Council, may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, amend 
Part I of the Third Schedule so as to include 
such qualification therein, and any such 
notification may also direct that an entry 
shall be made in the last column of Part I of 
the Third Schedule against such medical 
qualification declaring that it shall be a 
recognised medical qualification only when 
granted after a specified date. 

14. Special Provision in Certain Cases for 
Recognition of Medical Qualifications 
Granted by Medical Institutions in 
Countries with which there is No Scheme 
of Reciprocity: 

1. The Central Government after consultation 
with the Council may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, direct that medical 
qualifications granted by medical 
institutions in any country outside India in 
respect of which a scheme of reciprocity for 
the recognition of medical qualifications is 
not in force, shall be recognised medical 
qualification for the purposes of this Act or 
shall be so only when granted after a 
specified date: 

Provided that medical practice by 
persons possessing such qualifications: 


CFMT-25 (3rd Proof).p65 


196 


8/16/07, 11:08 AM 


















Law in Relation to Medical Practice: Part I 197 


(a) shall be permitted only if such persons 
are enrolled as medical practitioners in 
accordance with the law regulating the 
registration of medical practitioners for 
the time being in force in that country; 

(b) shall be limited to the institution to 
which they are attached for the time 
being for the purposes of teaching, 
research or charitable work; and 

(c) shall be limited to the period specified 
in this behalf by the Central Government 
by general or special order. 

2. In respect of any such medical qualification, 
the Central Government, after consultation 
with the council, may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, direct that it shall be a 
recognised medical qualification only when 
granted before a specified date. 

15. Right of Persons Possessing Qualifications 

in the Schedules to be Enrolled: 

1. Subject to the other provisions contained in 
tins Act, the medical qualifications included 
in the Schedules shall be sufficient 
qualification for enrolment on any State 
Medical Register. 

2. Save as provided in Section 25, no person 
other than a medical practitioner enrolled 
on a State Medical Register: 

(a) shall hold office as physician or surgeon 
or any other office (by whatever 
designation called) in Government or in 
any institution maintained by a local or 
other authority; 

(b) shall practise medicine in any state; 

(c) shall be entitled to sign or authenticate 
a medical or fitness certificate or any 
other certificate required by any law to 
be signed or authenticated by a duly 
qualified medical practitioner. 

(d) shall be entitled to give evidence at any 
inquest or in any court of law as an 
expert under Section 45 of the Indian 
Evidence Act, 1872 on any matter 
relating to medicine. 


3. Any person who acts in contravention of any 
provision of sub-section (2) shall be 
punished with imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to one year, or with fine 
which may extend to one thousand rupees, 
or with both. 

16. Power to Require Information as to Courses 
of Study and Examinations: 

Every university or medical institution in India 
which grants a recognised medical 
qualification shall furnish such information as 
the Council may, from time to time, require as 
to the courses of study and examinations to be 
undergone in order to obtain such qualification, 
as to the ages at which such courses of study 
and examinations are required to be undergone 
and such qualification is conferred and 
generally as to the requisites for obtaining such 
qualification. 

17. Inspection of Examinations: 

1. The Committee shall appoint such number 
of medical inspectors as it may deem 
requisite to inspect any medical institution, 
college, hospital or other institution where 
medical education is given or to attend any 
examination held by any university or 
medical institution for the purpose of 
recommending to the Central Government 
recognition of medical qualifications 
granted by that university or medical 
institution. 

2. The medical inspectors shall not interfere 
with the conduct of any training or 
examination, but shall report to the 
Committee on the adequacy of the standards 
of medical education including staff, 
equipment, accommodation, training and 
other facilities prescribed for giving medical 
education or on the sufficiency of every 
examination which they attend. 

3. The Committee shall forward a copy of any 
such report to the university or medical 
institution concerned, and shall also forward 


CFMT-25 (3rd Proof).p65 


197 


8/16/07, 11:08 AM 


















198 Concise Textbook of Forensic Medicine and Toxicology 


a copy with the remarks of the university or 
institution thereon, to the Central 
Government. 

18. Visitors at Examinations: 

1. The Council may appoint such number of 
visitors as it may deem requisite to inspect 
any medical institution, college, hospital or 
other institution where medical education 
is given or to attend any examination held 
by any university or medical institution for 
the purpose of granting recognised medical 
qualifications. 

2. Any person, whether he is a member of the 
Council or not, may be appointed as a visitor 
under this section but a person who is 
appointed as an inspector under Section 17 
for any inspection or examination shall not 
be appointed as a visitor for the same 
inspection or examination. 

3. The visitors shall not interfere with the 
conduct of any training or examination, but 
shall report to the President of the Council 
on the adequacy of the standards of medical 
education including staff, equipment, 
accommodation, training and other facilities 
prescribed for giving medical education or 
on the sufficiency of every examination 
which they attend. 

4. The report of a visitor shall be treated as 
confidential unless in any particular case the 
President of the Council otherwise directs: 

Provided that if the Central Government 
requires a copy of the report of a visitor, 
the Council shall furnish the same. 

19. Withdrawal of Recognition: 

1. When upon report by the Committee or the 
visitor it appears to the Council: 

(a) that the courses of study and 
examination to be undergone in, or the 
proficiency required from candidates at 
any examination held by any university 
or medical institution, 

(b) that the staff, equipment, accom¬ 
modation, training and other facilities 


for instruction and training provided in 
such university or medical institution or 
in any college or other institution 
affiliated to that university, do not 
conform to the standards prescribed by 
the Council, the Council shall make a 
representation to that effect to the 
Central Government. 

2. After considering such representation, the 
Central Government may send it to the 
Government of the State in which the 
university or medical institution is situated 
and the State Government shall forward it 
along with such remarks as it may choose 
to make to the university or medical 
institution, with an intimation of the period 
within which the university or medical 
institution may submit its explanation to the 
State Government. 

3. On the receipt of the explanation or, where 
no explanation is submitted within the 
period fixed, then on the expiry of that 
period the State Government shall make 
its recommendations to the Central 
Government. 

4. The Central Government, after making 
such further inquiry, if any, as it may think 
fit, may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, direct that an entry shall be made 
in the appropriate Schedule against the said 
medical qualification declaring that it shall 
be a recognised medical qualification only 
when granted before a specified date or that 
the said medical qualification if granted to 
students of a specified college or institution 
affiliated to any university shall be a 
recognised medical qualification only 
when granted before a specified date or, 
as the case may be, that the said medical 
qualification shall be a recognised medical 
qualification in relation to a specified 
college or institution affiliated to any 
university only when granted after a 
specified date. 


CFMT-25 (3rd Proof).p65 


198 


8/16/07, 11:08 AM 


















Law in Relation to Medical Practice: Part I 199 


19A. Minimum Standards of Medical 
Education: 

1. The Council may prescribe the minimum 
standards of medical education required for 
granting recognised medical qualifications 
(other than postgraduate medical 
qualifications) by universities or medical 
institutions in India. 

2. Copies of the draft regulations and of all 
subsequent amendments thereof shall be 
furnished by the Council to all State 
Governments and the Council shall before 
submitting the regulations or any 
amendment thereof, as the case may be, to 
the Central Government for sanction, take 
into consideration the comments of any state 
government received within three months 
from the furnishing of the copies as 
aforesaid. 

3. The Committee shall from time to time 
report to the Council on the efficacy of the 
regulations and may recommend to the 
Council such amendments thereof as it may 
think fit. 

20. Postgraduate Medical Education 

Committee for Assisting Council in 

Matters Relating to Postgraduate 

Medical Education: 

1. The Council may prescribe standards of 
postgraduate medical education for the 
guidance of universities, and may advise 
universities in the matter of securing 
uniform standards for postgraduate medical 
education throughout India, and for this 
purpose the Central Government may 
constitute from among the members of the 
Council a Postgraduate Medical Education 
Committee (hereinafter referred to as the 
Postgraduate Committee). 

2. The Postgraduate Committee shall consist 
of nine members all of whom shall be 
persons possessing postgraduate medical 
qualifications and experience of teaching or 


examining postgraduate students of 
medicine. 

3. Six of the members of the Postgraduate 
Committee shall be nominated by the 
Central Government and the remaining 
three members shall be elected by the 
Council from amongst its members. 

4. For the purpose of considering postgraduate 
studies in a subject, the Postgraduate 
Committee may co-opt, as and when 
necessary, one or more members qualified 
to assist it in that subject. 

5. The views and recommendations of the 
Postgraduate Committee on all matters shall 
be placed before the Council, and if the 
Council does not agree with the views 
expressed or the recommendations made by 
the Postgraduate Committee on any matter, 
the Council shall forward them together 
with its observations to the Central 
Government for decision. 

20A. Professional Conduct: 

1. The Council may prescribe standards of 
professional conduct and etiquette and a 
code of ethics for medical practitioners. 

2. Regulations made by the Council under sub¬ 
section (1) may specify which violations 
thereof shall constitute infamous conduct in 
any professional respect, that is to say, 
professional misconduct, and such 
provisions shall have effect notwithstanding 
anything contained in any law for the time 
being in force. 

21. The Indian Medical Register: 

1. The Council shall cause to be maintained 
in the prescribed manner a register of 
medical practitioners to be known as the 
Indian Medical Register, which shall contain 
the names of all persons who are for the time 
being enrolled on any State Medical 
Register and who possess any of the 
recognised medical qualifications. 

2. It shall be the duty of the Registrar of the 
Council to keep the Indian Medical Register 


CFMT-25 (3rd Proof).p65 


199 


8/16/07, 11:08 AM 


















200 Concise Textbook of Forensic Medicine and Toxicology 


in accordance with the provisions of this Act 
and of any orders made by the Council, and 
from time to time to revise the register and 
publish it in the Gazette of India and in such 
other manner as may be prescribed. 

3. Such register shall be deemed to be a public 
document within the meaning of the Indian 
Evidence Act, 1872 (1 of 1872), and may 
be proved by a copy published in the Gazette 
of India. 

22. Supply of Copies of the State Medical 
Registers: Each State Medical Council shall 
supply to the Council six printed copies of the 
State Medical Register as soon as may be after 
the commencement of this Act and 
subsequently after the first day of April of each 
year, and each Registrar of a State Medical 
Council shall inform the Council without delay 
of all additions to and other amendments in 
the State Medical Register made from time to 
time. 

23. Registration in the Indian Medical 
Register: The Registrar of the Council, may, 
on receipt of the report of registration of a 
person in a State Medical Register or on 
application made in the prescribed by any 
such person, enter his name in the Indian 
Medical Register: 

Provided that the Registrar is satisfied that 
the person concerned possesses a recognised 
medical qualification. 

24. Removal of Names from the Indian Medical 
Register: 

1. If the name of any person enrolled on State 
Medical Register is removed therefrom in 
pursuance of any power conferred by or 
under any law relating to registration of 
medical practitioners for the time being in 
force in any State, the Council shall direct 
the removal of the name of such person from 
the Indian Medical Register. 

2. Where the name of any person has been 
removed from a State Medical Register on 


the ground of professional misconduct or 
any other ground except that he is not 
possessed of the requisite medical 
qualifications or where any application 
made by the said person for restoration of 
his name to the State Medical Register has 
been rejected he may appeal in the 
prescribed manner and subject to such 
conditions including conditions as to the 
payment of a fee as may be laid down in 
rules made by the Central Government in 
this behalf, to the Central Government, 
whose decision, which shall be given after 
consulting the Council, shall be binding on 
the State Government and on the authorities 
concerned with the preparation of the State 
Medical Register. 

25. Provisional Registration: 

1. A citizen of India possessing a medical 
qualification granted by a medical institution 
outside India included in Part II of the Third 
Schedule, who is required to undergo 
practical training as prescribed under sub¬ 
section (3) of Section 13, shall, on 
production of proper evidence that he has 
been selected for such practical training in 
an approved institution, be entitled to be 
registered provisionally in a State Medical 
Register and shall be entitled to practice 
medicine in the approved institution for the 
purposes of such training and for no other 
purpose. 

2. A person who has passed the qualifying 
examination of any university or medical 
institution in India for the grant of a 
recognised medical qualification shall be 
entitled to be registered provisionally in a 
State Medical Register for the purpose of 
enabling him to be engaged in employment 
in a resident medical capacity in any 
approved institution, or in the Medical 
Service of the Armed Forces of the Union, 
and for no other purpose, on production of 
proper evidence that he has been selected 
for such employment. 


CFMT-25 (3rd Proof).p65 


200 


8/16/07, 11:08 AM 


















Law in Relation to Medical Practice: Part I 201 


3. The names of all persons provisionally 
registered under sub-section (1) or sub¬ 
section (2) in the State Medical Register 
shall be entered therein separately from the 
names of other persons registered therein. 

4. A person registered provisionally as 
aforesaid who has completed practical 
training referred to in sub-section (1) or who 
has been engaged for the prescribed period 
in employment in a resident medical 
capacity in any approved institution or in 
the Medical Service of the Armed Forces 
of the Union, as the case may be, shall be 
entitled to registration in the State Medical 
Register under Section 15. 

26. Registration of Additional Qualification: 

1. If any person whose name is entered in the 
Indian Medical Register obtains any title, 
diploma or other qualification for 
proficiency in sanitary science, public health 
or medicine, which is a recognised medical 
qualification, he shall, on application made 
in this behalf in the prescribed manner, be 
entitled to have an entry stating such other 
title, diploma, or other qualification made 
against his name in the Indian Medical 
Register either in substitution for or in 
addition to any entry previously made. 

2. The entries in respect of any such person in 
a State Medical Register shall be altered in 
accordance with the alterations made in the 
Indian Medical Register. 

27. Privileges of Persons who are Enrolled on 
the Indian Medical Register: Subject to the 
conditions and restrictions laid down in this 
Act regarding medical practice by persons 
possessing certain recognised medical 
qualifications, every person whose name is for 
the time being borne on the Indian Medical 
Register shall be entitled according to his 
qualifications to practise as a medical 
practitioner in any part of India and to recover 
in due course of law in respect of such practice 


any expenses, charges in respect of 
medicament or other appliances, or any fees 
to which he may be entitled. 

28. Person Enrolled on the Indian Medical 
Register to Notify Change of Place of 
Residence or Practice: Every person 
registered in the Indian Medical Register shall 
notify any transfer of the place of his residence 
or practice to the Council and to the State 
Medical Council concerned, within thirty days 
of such transfer, failing which his right to 
participate in the election of members to the 
Council or a State Medical Council shall be 
liable to be forfeited by order of the Central 
Government either permanently or for such 
period as may be specified therein. 

29. Information to be Furnished by the Council 
and Publication thereof: 

1. The Council shall furnish such reports, 
copies of its minutes, abstracts of its 
accounts, and other information to the 
Central Government as that Government 
may require. 

2. The Central Government may publish in 
such manner as it may think fit, any report, 
copy, abstract or other information furnished 
to it under this section or under Sections 17 
and 18. 

30. Commissions of Inquiry: 

1. Whenever it is made to appear to the Central 
Government that the Council is not 
complying with any of the provisions of this 
Act, the Central Government may refer the 
particulars of the complaint to a 
Commission of Inquiry consisting of three 
persons, two of whom shall be appointed 
by the Central Government, one being a 
Judge of a High Court, and one by the 
Council, and such Commission shall 
proceed to inquire in a summary manner and 
to report to the Central Government as to 
the truth of the matters charged in the 
complaint, and in case of any charge of 


CFMT-25 (3rd Proof).p65 


201 


8/16/07, 11:08 AM 


















202 Concise Textbook of Forensic Medicine and Toxicology 


default or of improper action being found 
by the Commission to have been 
established, the Commission shall 
recommend the remedies, if any, which are 
in its opinion necessary. 

2. The Central Government may require the 
Council to adopt the remedies so 
recommended within such time as, having 
regard to the report of the Commission, it 
may think fit, and if the Council fails to 
comply with any such requirement, the 
Central Government may amend the 
regulations of the Council or make such 
provision or order or take such other steps 
as may seem necessary to give effect to the 
recommendations of the Commission. 

3. A Commission of Inquiry shall have power 
to administer oaths, to enforce the 
attendance of witnesses and the production 
of documents, and shall have all such other 
necessary powers for the purpose of any 
inquiry conducted by it as are exercised by 
a civil court under the Code of Civil 
Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908). 

31. Protection of Action taken in Good Faith: 

No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding 
shall lie against the Government, the Council 
or a State Medical Council or any Committee 
thereof, or any officer or servant of the 
Government or Councils aforesaid for anything 
which is in good faith done or intended to be 
done under this Act. 

32. Power to Make Rules: 

1. The Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, make 
rules to carry out the purposes of this Act. 

2. All rules made under this section shall be 
laid or not less than thirty days before both 
Houses of Parliament as soon as possible 
after they are made, and shall be subject to 
such modifications as Parliament may make 
during the session in which they are so laid 
or the session immediately following. 


33. Power to Make Regulations: The Council 
may, with the previous sanction of the Central 
Government, make regulations generally to 
carry out the purposes of this Act, and, without 
prejudice to the generality of this power, such 
regulations may provide for: 

(a) the management of the property of the 
Council and the maintenance and audit of 
its accounts; 

(b) the summoning and holding of meetings of 
the Council, the times and places where such 
meetings are to be held, the conduct of 
business thereat and the number of members 
necessary to constitute a quorum; 

(c) the resignation of members of the Council; 

(d) the power and duties of the President and 
Vice-President; 

(e) the mode of appointment of the Executive 
Committee and other committees, the 
summoning and holding of meetings, and 
the conduct of business of such committees; 

(f) the tenure of office, and the powers and 
duties of the Registrar and other officers and 
servants of the Council: 

(i) the form of the scheme, the particulars 
to be given in such scheme, the manner 
in which the scheme is to be preferred 
and the fee payable with the scheme 
under clause (b) of sub-section (2) of 
Section 10A; 

(ii) any other factors under Clause (g) of 
sub-section (7) of Section 10A; 

(iii) the criteria for identifying a student who 
has been granted a medical qualification 
referred to in the explanation to sub¬ 
section (3) of Section 10B; 

(g) the particulars to be stated, and the proof of 
qualifications to be given the applications 
for registration under this Act; 

(h) the fees to be paid on applications and 
appeals under this Act; 

(i) the appointment, powers, duties and 
procedure of medical inspectors and 
visitors; 


CFMT-25 (3rd Proof).p65 


202 


8/16/07, 11:08 AM 


















Law in Relation to Medical Practice: Part I 203 


(j) the courses and period of study and of 
practical training to be undertaken, the 
subjects of examination and the standards 
of proficiency therein to be obtained, in 
universities or medical institutions for grant 
of recognised medical qualifications; 

(k) the standards of staff, equipment, 
accommodation, training and other facilities 
for medical education; 

(l) the conduct of professional examinations, 
qualifications of examiners and the 
conditions of admission to such 
examinations; 

(m) the standards of professional conduct and 
etiquette and code of ethics to be observed 
by medical practitioners; and 

(i) the modalities for conducting screening 
tests under sub-section (4A), and under 
proviso to sub-section (4B) and for 
issuing eligibility certificate under sub¬ 
section (4B) of Section 13; 

(n) any matter for which under this Act 
provision may be made by regulations. 

34. Repeal of Act 27 of 1933: 

1. The Indian Medical Council Act, 1933, is 
hereby repealed. 

2. Notwithstanding anything contained in this 
Act, until the Council is constituted in 
accordance with the provisions of this Act: 

(a) the Medical Council of India as 
constituted immediately before the 
commencement of this Act under the 
Indian Medical Council Act, 1933 (27 
of 1933), with the addition of seven 
members nominated thereto by the 
Central Government from among 
persons enrolled on any of the State 
Medical Registers who possess the 
medical qualifications included in Part 
I of the Third Schedule to this Act 
(hereinafter referred to as the said 
Medical Council), shall be deemed to 
be the Council constituted under this Act 


and may exercise any of the powers 
conferred or perform any of the duties 
imposed on the Council; and any 
vacancy occurring in the said Medical 
Council may be filled up in such manner 
as the Central Government may think 
fit; and 

(b) the Executive Committee and other 
Committees of the said Medical Council 
as constituted immediately before the 
commencement of this Act, shall be 
deemed to be the Executive Committee 
and other Committees constituted under 
this Act. 

NEW ETHICAL REGULATIONS FROM 
MEDICAL COUNCIL OF INDIA 

These Regulations may be called the Indian 
Medical Council (professional conduct, and ethics) 
Regulations, 2002 and they are binding on all 
doctors in India. 

CHAPTER 1 

1. Code of Medical Ethics 

A. Declaration 

Each applicant, at the time of making an application 
for registration under the provisions of the Act, shall 
be provided a copy of the declaration and shall 
submit a duly signed Declaration as provided in 
Appendix 1. The applicant shall also certify that 
he/she had read and agreed to abide by the same. 

B. Duties and Responsibilities of the Physician 
in General 

1.1 Character of physician: (Doctors with 
qualification of MBBS or MBBS with post¬ 
graduate degree/diploma or with equivalent 
qualification in any medical discipline): 

1.1.1 A physician shall uphold the dignity and 
honour of his profession. 


CFMT-25 (3rd Proof).p65 


203 


8/16/07, 11:08 AM 


















204 Concise Textbook of Forensic Medicine and Toxicology 


1.1.2 The prime object of the medical 
profession is to render service to 
humanity; reward or financial gain is a 
subordinate consideration. Whosoever 
chooses his profession, assumes the 
obligation to conduct himself in 
accordance with its ideals. A physician 
should be an upright man, instructed in 
the art of healing. He shall keep himself 
pure in character and be diligent in 
caring for the sick; he should be modest, 
sober, patient, prompt in discharging his 
duty without anxiety; conducting 
himself with propriety in his profession 
and in all the actions of his life. 

1.1.3 No person other than a doctor having 
qualification recognised by Medical 
Council of India and registered with 
Medical Council of India/State Medical 
Council(s) is allowed to practise modern 
system of medicine or surgery. A person 
obtaining qualification in any other 
system of medicine is not allowed to 
practise modern system of medicine in 
any form. 

1.2 Maintaining good medical practice: 

1.2.1 The principal objective of the medical 
profession is to render service to 
humanity with full respect for the dignity 
of profession and man. Physicians 
should merit the confidence of patients 
entrusted to their care, rendering to each 
a full measure of service and devotion. 
Physicians should try continuously to 
improve medical knowledge and skills 
and should make available to their 
patients and colleagues the benefits of 
their professional attainments. The 
physician should practise methods of 
healing founded on scientific basis and 
should not associate professionally with 
anyone who violates this principle. The 
honoured ideals of the medical 
profession imply that the responsibilities 


of the physician extend not only to 
individuals but also to society. 

1.2.2 Membership in Medical Society: For the 
advancement of his profession, a 
physician should affiliate with 
associations and societies of allopathic 
medical professions and involve actively 
in the functioning of such bodies. 

1.2.3 A physician should participate in 
professional meeting as part of 
Continuing Medical Education 
programmes, for at least 30 hours every 
five years, organised by reputed 
professional academic bodies or any 
other authorised organisations. The 
compliance of this requirement shall be 
informed regularly, to Medial Council 
of India or the State Medical Councils 
as the case may be. 

1 .3 Maintenance of medical records: 

1.3.1 Every physician shall maintain the 
medical records pertaining to his/her 
indoor patients for a period of 3 years 
from the date of commencement of the 
treatment in a standard proforma laid 
down by the Medical Council of India 
and attached as Appendix 3. 

1.3.2 If any request is made for medical 
records either by the patients/authorised 
attendant or legal authorities involved, 
the same may be duly acknowledged and 
documents shall be issued within the 
period of 72 hours. 

1.3.3 A registered medical practitioner shall 
maintain a Register of Medical 
Certificates giving full details of 
certificates issued. When issuing a 
medical certificate he/ she shall always 
enter the identification marks of the 
patient and keep a copy of the certificate. 
He/she shall not omit to record the 
signature and/or thumb mark, address 
and at least one identification mark of 
the patient on the medical certificates or 


CFMT-25 (3rd Proof).p65 


204 


8/16/07, 11:08 AM 


















Law in Relation to Medical Practice: Part I 205 


report. The medical certificate shall be 
prepared as in Appendix 2. 

1.3.4 Efforts shall be made to computerise 
medical records for quick retrieval. 

1 .4 Display of registration numbers: 

1.4.1 Every physician shall display the 
registration number accorded to him by 
the State Medical Council/Medical 
Council of India in his clinic and in all 
his prescriptions, certificates, money 
receipts given to his patients. 

1.4.2 Physicians shall display as suffix to 
their names only recognised medical 
degrees or such certificates/diplomas 
and memberships/honours which 
confer professional knowledge or 
recognises any exemplary qualification/ 
achievements. 

1.5 Use of generic names of drugs: Every 
physician should, as far as possible, 
prescribe drugs with generic names and he/ 
she shall ensure that there is a rational 
prescription and use of drugs. 

1.6 Highest quality assurance in patient care: 

Every physician should aid in safeguarding 
the profession against admission to it of those 
who are deficient in moral character or 
education. Physician shall not employ in 
connection with his professional practice any 
attendant who is neither registered nor 
enlisted under the Medical Acts in force and 
shall not permit such persons to attend, treat 
or perform operations upon patients wherever 
professional discretion or skill is required. 

1.7 Exposure of unethical conduct: A 
physician should expose, without fear or 
favour, incompetent or corrupt, dishonest or 
unethical conduct on the part of members 
of the profession. 

1.8 Payment of professional services: The 

physician, engaged in the practice of 
medicine shall give priority to the interests 
of patients. The personal financial interests 
of a physician should not conflict with the 
medical interests of patients. A physician 


should announce his fees before rendering 
service and not after the operation or 
treatment is under way. Remuneration 
received for such services should be in the 
form and amount specifically announced to 
the patient at the time the service is rendered. 
It is unethical to enter into a contract of “no 
cure no payment”. Physician rendering 
service on behalf of the state shall refrain 
from anticipating or accepting any 
consideration. 

1.9 Evasion of legal restrictions: The physician 
shall observe the laws of the country in 
regulating the practice of medicine and shall 
also not assist others to evade such laws. He 
should be cooperative in observance and 
enforcement of sanitary laws and regulations 
in the interest of public health. A physician 
should observe the provisions of the State 
Acts like Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940; 
Pharmacy Act, 1948; Narcotic Drugs and 
Psychotropic Substances Act. 1985; Medical 
Termination of Pregnancy Act, 1971; 
Transplantation of Human Organ Act, 1994; 
Mental Health Act, 1987; Environmental 
Protection Act, 1986; Pre-natal Sex 
Determination Test Act, 1994; Drugs and 
Magic Remedies (Objectionable 
Advertisement) Act, 1954; Persons with 
Disabilities (Equal Opportunities and Full 
Participation) Act, 1995 and Bio-medical 
Waste (Management and Handling) Rules, 
1998 and such other Acts, Rules, Regulations 
made by the Central/State Governments or 
Local Administrative Bodies or any other 
relevant Act relating to the protection and 
promotion of public health. 

CHAPTER 2 

2. Duties of Physicians to their Patients 

2. 1 Obligations to the sick: 

2.1.1 Though a physician is not bound to treat 
each and every person asking his 
services, he should not only be ever 


CFMT-25 (3rd Proof).p65 


205 


8/16/07, 11:08 AM 


















206 Concise Textbook of Forensic Medicine and Toxicology 


ready to respond to the calls of the sick 
and the injured, but should be mindful 
of the high character of his mission and 
the responsibility he discharges in the 
course of his professional duties. In his 
treatment, he should never forget that the 
health and the lives of those entrusted 
to his care depend on his skill and 
attention. A physician should endeavour 
to add to the comfort of the sick by 
making his visits at the hour indicated 
to the patients. A physician advising a 
patient to seek service of another 
physician is acceptable, however, in case 
of emergency a physician must treat the 
patient. No physician shall arbitrarily 
refuse treatment to a patient. However, 
for good reason, when a patient is 
suffering from an ailment which is not 
within the range of experience of the 
treating physician, the physician may 
refuse treatment and refer the patient to 
another physician. 

2.1.2 Medical practitioner having any 
incapacity detrimental to the patient or 
which can affect his performance vis-a- 
vis the patient is not permitted to practice 
his profession. 

2.2 Patience, delicacy and secrecy: 
Patience and delicacy should characterise 
the physician. Confidence concerning 
individual or domestic life entrusted by 
patients to a physician and defects in the 
disposition or character of patients observed 
during medical attendance should never be 
revealed unless their revelation is required 
by the laws of the State. Sometimes, 
however, a physician must determine 
whether his duty to society requires him to 
employ knowledge, obtained through 
confidence as a physician, to protect a 
healthy person against a communicable 
disease to which he is about to be exposed. 


In such instance, the physician should act, 
as he would wish another to act toward one 
of his own family in like circumstances. 

2.3 Prognosis: The physician should neither 
exaggerate nor minimise the gravity of a 
patient’s condition. He should ensure 
himself that the patient, his relatives or his 
responsible friends have such knowledge of 
the patient’s condition as will serve in the 
best interests of the patient and the family. 

2.4 The patient must not be neglected: A 
physician is free to choose whom he will 
serve. He should, however, respond to any 
request for his assistance in an emergency. 
Once having undertaken a case, the 
physician should not neglect the patient, nor 
should he withdraw from the case without 
giving adequate notice to the patient and his 
family. Provisionally or fully registered 
medical practitioner shall not wilfully 
commit an act of negligence that may 
deprive his patient or patients from 
necessary medical care. 

2.5 Engagement for an obstetric case: When 
a physician who has been engaged to attend 
an obstetric case is absent and another is 
sent for and delivery accomplished, the 
acting physician is entitled to his 
professional fees, but should secure the 
patient’s consent to resign on the arrival of 
the physician engaged. 

CHAPTER 3 

3. Duties of Physician in Consultation 

3.1 Unnecessary consultations should be 
avoided: 

3.1.1 However, in case of serious illness and 
in doubtful or difficult conditions, the 
physician should request consultation, 
but under any circumstances such 
consultation should be justifiable and in 


CFMT-25 (3rd Proof).p65 


206 


8/16/07, 11:08 AM 


















Law in Relation to Medical Practice: Part I 207 


the interest of the patient only and not 
for any other consideration. 

3.1.2 Consulting pathologists/radiologists or 
asking for any other diagnostic Lab 
investigation should be done judiciously 
and not in a routine manner. 

3.2 Consultation for patient’s benefit: In 

every consultation, the benefit to the patient 
is of foremost importance. All physicians 
engaged in the case should be frank with 
the patient and his attendants. 

3.3 Punctuality in consultation: Utmost 
punctuality should be observed by a 
physician in making themselves available 
for consultations. 

3.4 Statement to patient after consultation: 

3.4.1 All statements to the patient or his 
representatives should take place in the 
presence of the consulting physicians, 
except as otherwise agreed. The 
disclosure of the opinion to the patient 
or his relatives or friends shall rest with 
the medical attendant. 

3.4.2. Differences of opinion should not be 
divulged unnecessarily but when there 
is irreconcilable difference of opinion 
the circumstances should be frankly and 
impartially explained to the patient or 
his relatives or friends. It would be 
opened to them to seek further advice if 
they so desire. 

3.5 Treatment after consultation : No decision 
should restrain the attending physician from 
making such subsequent variations in the 
treatment if any unexpected change occurs, 
but at the next consultation reasons for the 
variations should be discussed/explained. 
The same privilege, with its obligations, 
belongs to the consultant when sent for in 
an emergency during the absence of 
attending physician. The attending 


physician may prescribe medicine at any 
time for the patient, whereas the consultant 
may prescribe only in case of emergency or 
as an expert when called for. 

3.6 Patients referred to specialists: When a 
patient is referred to a specialist by the 
attending physician, a case summary of the 
patient should be given to the specialist, who 
should communicate his opinion in writing 
to the attending physician. 

3.7 Fees and other charges: 

3.7.1 A physician shall clearly display his fees 
and other charges on the board of his 
chamber and/or the hospitals he is 
visiting. Prescription should also make 
clear if the physician himself dispensed 
any medicine. 

3.7.2. A physician shall write his name and 
designation in full along with 
registration particulars in his 
prescription letterhead. 

Note: In government hospital where the 
patient-load is heavy, the name of the prescribing 
doctor must be written below his/her signature. 

CHAPTER 4 

4. Responsibilities of Physicians to Each 
Other 

4.1 Dependence of physicians on each other: 

A physician should consider it as a pleasure 
and privilege to render gratuitous service to 
all physicians and their immediate family 
dependants. 

4.2 Conduct in consultation: In consultations, 
no insincerity, rivalry or envy should be 
indulged in. All due respect should be 
observed towards the physician in-charge 
of the case and no statement or remark be 
made, which would impair the confidence 
reposed in him. For this purpose no 


CFMT-25 (3rd Proof).p65 


207 


8/16/07, 11:08 AM 


















208 Concise Textbook of Forensic Medicine and Toxicology 


discussion should be carried on in the 
presence of the patient or his representatives. 

4.3 Consultant not to take charge of the case: 
When a physician has been called for 
consultation, the Consultant should 
normally not take charge of the case, 
especially on the solicitation of the patient 
or friends. The Consultant shall not criticise 
the referring physician. He/she shall discuss 
the diagnosis treatment plan with the 
referring physician. 

4.4 Appointment of substitute: Whenever a 
physician requests another physician to 
attend his patients during his temporary 
absence from his practice, professional 
courtesy requires the acceptance of such 
appointment only when he has the capacity 
to discharge the additional responsibility 
along with his/her other duties. The 
physician acting under such an appointment 
should give the utmost consideration to the 
interests and reputation of the absent 
physician and all such patients should be 
restored to the care of the latter upon his/ 
her return. 

4.5 Visiting another physician’s cases: When 
it becomes the duty of a physician 
occupying an official position to see and 
report upon an illness or injury, he should 
communicate to the physician in attendance 
so as to give him an option of being present. 
The medical officer/physician occupying an 
official position should avoid remarks upon 
the diagnosis or the treatment that has been 
adopted. 

CHAPTER 5 

5. Duties of Physician to the Public and to 
the Paramedical Profession 

5.1 Physicians as citizens: Physicians, as good 
citizens, possessed of special training should 
disseminate advice on public health issues. 


They should play their part in enforcing the 
laws of the community and in sustaining the 
institutions that advance the interest of 
humanity. They should particularly co¬ 
operate with the authorities in the 
administration of sanitary/public health laws 
and regulations. 

5.2 Public and community health: Physicians, 
especially those engaged in public health 
work, should enlighten the public 
concerning quarantine regulations and 
measures for the prevention of epidemic and 
communicable diseases. At all times, the 
physician should notify the constituted 
public health authorities of every case of 
communicable disease under his care, in 
accordance with the laws, rules and 
regulations of the health authorities. When 
an epidemic occurs a physician should not 
abandon his duty for fear of contracting the 
disease himself. 

5.3 Pharmacists/Nurses: Physicians should 
recognise and promote the practice of 
different paramedical services such as, 
pharmacy and nursing as professions and 
should seek their cooperation wherever 
required. 

CHAPTER 6 
6. Unethical Acts 

A physician shall not aid or abet or commit any of 
the following acts which shall be constructed as 
unethical: 

6.1 Advertising: 

6.1.1 Soliciting patients directly or indirectly, 
by a physician, by a group of physicians 
or by institutions and organisations is 
unethical. A physician shall not make 
use of him/her (or his/her name) as 
subject of any form or manner of 
advertising or publicity through any 


CFMT-25 (3rd Proof).p65 


208 


8/16/07, 11:08 AM 


















Law in Relation to Medical Practice: Part I 209 


mode either alone or in conjunction with 
others which is of such a character as to 
invite attention to him or to his 
professional position, skill, qualification, 
achievements, attainments, specialities, 
appointments, associations, affiliations 
or honours and/or of such character as 
would ordinarily result in his self¬ 
aggrandisement. A physician shall not 
give to any person, whether far 
compensation or otherwise, any 
approval, recommendation, endorsement, 
certificate, report or statement with 
respect of any drug, medicine, nostrum 
remedy, surgical, or therapeutic article, 
apparatus or appliance or any 
commercial product or article with 
respect of any property, quality or use 
thereof or any test, demonstration or trial 
thereof, for use in connection with his 
name, signature, or photograph in any 
form or manner of advertising through 
any mode nor shall he boast of cases, 
operations, cures or remedies or permit 
the publication of report thereof through 
any mode. A medical practitioner is, 
however, permitted to make a formal 
announcement in press regarding the 
following: 

1. On starting practice. 

2. On change of type of practice. 

3. On changing address. 

4. On temporary absence from duty. 

5. On resumption of another practice. 

6. On succeeding to another practice. 

7. Public declaration of charges. 

6.1.2 Printing of self-photograph, or any such 
material of publicity in the letterhead or 
an signboard of the consulting room or 
any such clinical establishment shall be 
regarded as acts of self-advertisement 
and unethical conduct on the part of the 
physician. However, printing of 


sketches, diagrams, picture of human 
system shall not be treated as unethical. 

6.2 Patent and copyright: A physician may 
patent surgical instruments, appliances and 
medicine or copyright applications, methods 
and procedures. However, it shall be 
unethical if the benefits of such patents or 
copyrights are not made available in 
situations where the interest of large 
population is involved. 

6.3 Running an open shop (dispensing of 
drugs and appliances by physicians): A 

physician should not run an open shop for 
sale of medicine for dispensing prescriptions 
prescribed by doctors other than himself or 
for sale of medical or surgical appliances. 
It is not unethical for a physician to prescribe 
or supply drugs, remedies or appliances as 
long as there is no exploitation of the patient. 
Drugs prescribed by a physician or brought 
from the market for a patient should 
explicitly state the proprietary formulas as 
well as generic name of the drug. 

6.4 Rebates and commission: 

6.4.1 A physician shall not give, solicit, or 
receive nor shall he offer to give solicit 
or receive, any gift, gratuity, commission 
or bonus in consideration of or return 
for the referring, recommending or 
procuring of any patient for medical, 
surgical or other treatment. A physician 
shall not directly or indirectly, 
participate in or be a party to act of 
division, transference, assignment, sub¬ 
ordination, rebating, splitting or 
refunding of any fee for medical, 
surgical or other treatment. 

6.4.2 Provisions of Para 6.4.1 shall apply with 
equal force to the referring, 
recommending or procuring by a 
physician or any person, specimen or 
material for diagnostic purposes or other 
study/work. Nothing in this section, 


CFMT-25 (3rd Proof).p65 


209 


8/16/07, 11:08 AM 


















210 Concise Textbook of Forensic Medicine and Toxicology 


however, shall prohibit payment of 
salaries by a qualified physician to other 
duly qualified person rendering medical 
care under his supervision. 

6.5 Secret remedies: Prescribing or dispensing 
by a physician of secret remedial agents of 
which he does not know the composition, 
or the manufacture or promotion of their use 
is unethical and as such prohibited. All the 
drugs prescribed by a physician should 
always cany a proprietary formula and clear 
name. 

6.6 Human rights: The physician shall not aid 
or abet torture nor shall he be a party to 
either infliction of mental or physical trauma 
or concealment of torture inflicted by some 
other person or agency in clear violation of 
human rights. 

6.7 Euthanasia: Practising euthanasia shall 
constitute unethical conduct. However, on 
specific occasion, the question of 
withdrawing supporting devices to sustain 
cardiopulmonary function even after brain 
death, shall be decided only by a team of 
doctors and not merely by the treating 
physician alone. A team of doctors shall 
declare withdrawal of support system. 
Such team shall consist of the doctor in 
charge of the patient, Chief Medical 
Officer/Medical Officer in charge of the 
hospital and doctor nominated by the in¬ 
charge of the hospital from the hospital 
staff or in accordance with the provisions 
of the Transplantation of Human Organ 
Act, 1994. 

CHAPTER 7 
7. Misconduct 

The following acts of commission or omission on 
the part of a physician shall constitute professional 
misconduct rendering him/her liable for 
disciplinary action: 


7.1 Violation of the regulations: If he/she 
commits any violation of these Regulations. 

7.2 If he/she does not maintain the medical 
records of his/her indoor patients for a 
period of three years as per Regulation 1.3 
and refuses to provide the same within 72 
hours when the patient or his/her authorised 
representative makes a request for it as per 
the Regulation 1.3.2. 

7.3 If he/she does not display the registration 
number accorded to him/her by the State 
Medical Council or the Medical Council of 
India in his clinic, prescriptions and 
certificates, etc., issued by him or violates 
the provisions of Regulation 1.4.2. 

7.4 Adultery or improper conduct: Abuse of 
professional position by committing 
adultery or improper conduct with a patient 
or by maintaining an improper association 
with a patient will render a Physician liable 
for disciplinary action as provided under the 
Indian Medical Council Act, 1956 or the 
concerned State Medical Council Act. 

7.5 Conviction by Court of Law: Conviction 
by a Court of Law for offences involving 
Moral Turpitude/Criminal Acts. 

7.6 Sex determination tests: On no account 
sex determination test shall be undertaken 
with the intent to terminate the life of a 
female foetus developing in her mother’s 
womb, unless there are other absolute 
indications for termination of pregnancy as 
specified in the Medical Termination of 
Pregnancy Act, 1971. Any act of termination 
of pregnancy of normal female foetus 
amounting to female foeticide shall be 
regarded as professional misconduct on the 
part of the physician leading to penal erasure 
besides rendering him liable to criminal 
proceedings as per the provisions of this Act. 

7.7 Signing professional certificates, reports 
and other documents: Registered medical 
practitioners are in certain cases bound by 
law to give, or may from time to time be 


CFMT-25 (3rd Proof).p65 


210 


8/16/07, 11:08 AM 


















Law in Relation to Medical Practice: Part I 211 


called upon or requested to give certificates, 
notification, reports and other documents of 
similar character signed by them in their 
professional capacity for subsequent use in 
the courts or for administrative purposes, 
etc. Such documents, among others, include 
the ones given at Appendix-4. Any 
registered practitioner who is shown to have 
signed or given under his name and 
authority any such certificate, notification, 
report or document of a similar character 
which is untrue, misleading or improper, is 
liable to have his name deleted from the 
register. 

7.8 A registered medical practitioner shall not 
contravene the provisions of the Drugs and 
Cosmetics Act and Regulations made 
thereunder. Accordingly: 

(a) prescribing steroids/psychotropic drugs 
when there is no absolute medical 
indication; 

(b) selling Schedule ‘H’ & ‘L’ drugs and 
poisons to the public except to his 
patient. 

In contravention of the above 
provisions shall constitute gross 
professional misconduct on the part of 
the physician. 

7.9 Performing or enabling unqualified person 
to perform an abortion or any illegal 
operation for which there is no medical, 
surgical or psychological indication. 

7.10 A registered medical practitioner shall not 
issue certificates of efficiency in modern 
medicine to unqualified or non-medical 
person. 

Note: The foregoing does not restrict the 
proper training and instruction of bonafide students, 
midwives, dispensers, surgical attendants, or skilled 
mechanical and technical assistants and therapy 
assistants under the personal supervision of 
physicians. 

7.11 A physician should not contribute to the lay 
press articles and give interviews regarding 


diseases and treatments which may have the 
effect of advertising himself or soliciting 
practices; but is open to write to the lay press 
under his own name on matters of public 
health, hygienic living or to deliver public 
lectures, give talks on the radio/TV/ internet 
chat for the same purpose and send 
announcement of the same to lay press. 

7.12. An institution run by a physician for a 
particular purpose such as a maternity home, 
nursing home, private hospital, 
rehabilitation centre or any type of training 
institution, etc., may be advertised in the lay 
press, but such advertisements should not 
contain anything more than the name of the 
institution, type of patients admitted, type 
of training and other facilities offered and 
the fees. 

7.13 It is improper for a physician to use an 
unusually large sign board and write on it 
anything other than his name, qualifications 
obtained from a university or a statutory 
body, titles and name of his speciality, 
registration number including the name of 
the State Medical Council under which 
registered. The same should be the contents 
of his prescription papers. It is improper to 
affix a signboard on a chemist’s shop or in 
places where he does not reside or work. 

7.14 The registered medical practitioner shall not 
disclose the secrets of a patient that have 
been learnt in the exercise of his/her 
profession except: 

(i) in a court of law under order of the 
Presiding Judge; 

(ii) in circumstances where there is a serious 
and identified risk to a specific person 
and/or community; and 

(iii) notifiable diseases. In case of 
communicable/notifiable diseases, 
concerned public health authorities 
should be informed immediately. 

7.15 The registered medical practitioner shall not 
refuse on religious grounds alone to give 


CFMT-25 (3rd Proof).p65 


211 


8/16/07, 11:08 AM 


















212 Concise Textbook of Forensic Medicine and Toxicology 


assistance in or conduct of sterility, birth 
control, circumcision and medical 
termination of pregnancy when there is 
medical indication, unless the medical 
practitioner feels himself/herself 
incompetent to do so. 

7.16 Before performing an operation the 
physician should obtain in writing the 
consent from the husband or wife, parent 
or guardian in the case of minor, or the 
patient himself as the case may be. In an 
operation which may result in sterility the 
consent of both husband and wife is needed. 

7.17 A registered medical practitioner shall not 
publish photographs or case reports of his/ 
her patients without their permission, in any 
medical or other journal in a manner by 
which their identity could be made out. If 
the identity is not to be disclosed, the 
consent is not needed. 

7.18 In the case of running a nursing home by a 
physician and employing assistants to help 
him/her, the ultimate responsibility rests on 
the physician. 

7.19 A physician shall not use touts or agents for 
procuring patients. 

7.20 A physician shall not claim to be specialist 
unless he has a special qualification in that 
branch. 

7.21 No act of in vitro fertilisation or artificial 
insemination shall be undertaken without 
the informed consent of the female patient 
and her spouse as well as the donor. Such 
consent shall be obtained in writing only 
after the patient is provided, at her own level 
of comprehension, with sufficient 
information about the purpose, methods, 
risks, inconveniences, disappointments of 
the procedure and possible risks and 
hazards. 

7.22 Research: Clinical drug trials or other 
research involving patients or volunteers as 
per the guidelines of ICMR can be 
undertaken, provided ethical considerations 


are borne in mind. Violation of existing 
ICMR guidelines in this regard shall 
constitute misconduct. Consent taken from 
the patient for trial of drug or therapy which 
is not as per the guidelines shall also be 
construed as misconduct. 

7.23 If a physician posted in rural area is found 
absent on more than two occasions during 
inspection by the Head of the District Health 
Authority or the Chairman, Zila Parishad, 
the same shall be construed as a misconduct 
if it is recommended to the Medical Council 
of India/State Medical Council by the State 
Government for action under these 
Regulations. 

7.24 If a physician posted in a medical college/ 
institution both as teaching faculty or 
otherwise shall remain in hospital/college 
during the assigned duty hours. If they are 
found absent on more than two occasions 
during this period, the same shall be 
construed as a misconduct if it is certified 
by the Principal/Medical Superintendent 
and forwarded through the State 
Government to Medical Council of India/ 
State Medical Council for action under these 
Regulations. 

CHAPTER 8 

8. Punishment and Disciplinary Action 

8.1 It must be clearly understood that the 
instances of offences and of professional 
misconduct which are given above do not 
constitute and are not intended to constitute 
a complete list of the infamous acts which 
calls for disciplinary action, and that by 
issuing this notice the Medical Council of 
India and/or State medical Councils are in 
no way precluded from considering and 
dealing with any other form of professional 
misconduct on the part of a registered 
practitioner. Circumstances may and do 


CFMT-25 (3rd Proof).p65 


212 


8/16/07, 11:08 AM 


















Law in Relation to Medical Practice: Part I 213 


arise from time to time in relation to which 
there may occur questions of professional 
misconduct which do not come within any 
of these categories. Every care should be 
taken that the code is not violated in letter 
or spirit. In such instances as in all others, 
the Medical Council of India and/or State 
Medical Councils have to consider and 
decide upon the facts brought before the 
Medical Council of India and/or State 
Medical Councils. 

8.2 It is made clear that any complaint with 
regard to professional misconduct can be 
brought before the appropriate Medical 
Council for disciplinary action. Upon 
receipt of any complaint of professional 
misconduct, the appropriate Medical 
Council would hold an enquiry and give 
opportunity to the registered medical 
practitioner to be heard in person or by 
pleader. If the medical practitioner is found 
to be guilty of committing professional 
misconduct, the appropriate Medical 
Council may award such punishment as 
deemed necessary or may direct the removal 
altogether or for a specified period, from 
the register of the name of the delinquent 
registered practitioner. Deletion from the 
Register shall be widely publicised in local 
press as well as in the publications of 
different Medical Associations/Societies/ 
Bodies. 

8.3 In case the punishment of removal from the 
register is for a limited period, the 
appropriate Council may also direct that the 
name so removed shall be restored in the 
Register after the expiry of the period for 
which the name was ordered to be removed. 

8.4 Decision on complaint against delinquent 
physician shall be taken within a time limit 
of six months. 

8.5 During the pendency of the complaint the 
appropriate Council may restrain the 
physician from performing the procedure or 
practice which is under scrutiny. 


8.6. Professional incompetence shall be judged 
by peer group as per guidelines prescribed 
by Medical Council of India. 

APPENDIX-1 
A. Declaration 

At the time of registration, each applicant shall be 
given a copy of the following declaration by the 
Registrar concerned and the applicant shall read 
and agree to abide by the same: 

1. I solemnly pledge myself to consecrate my 
life to the service of humanity. 

2. Even under threat. I will not use my medical 
knowledge contrary to the laws of humanity. 

3. I will maintain utmost respect for human 
life from the time of conception. 

4. I will not permit considerations of religion, 
nationality, race, party politics or social 
standing to intervene between my duty and 
my patient. 

5. I will practise my profession with 
conscience and dignity. 

6. The health of my patient will be my first 
consideration. 

7. I will respect the secrets which are confined 
in me. 

8. I will give to my teachers the respect and 
gratitude which is their due. 

9. I will maintain by all means in my power, 
the honour and noble traditions of medical 
profession. 

10. I will treat my colleagues with all respect 
and dignity. 

11. I shall abide by the code of medical ethics 
as enunciated in the Indian Medical Council 
(Professional Conduct. Etiquette and Ethics) 
Regulations 2002. 

I make these promises solemnly, freely and 
upon my honour. 

Signature. 

Name. 

Place. 


CFMT-25 (3rd Proof).p65 


213 


8/16/07, 11:08 AM 





















214 Concise Textbook of Forensic Medicine and Toxicology 


Address. 

Date. 

APPENDIX-2 

1. Form of Certificate Recommended for 
Leave or Extension or Communication 
of Leave and for Fitness 

Signature of patient 

Or thumb impression. 

To be tilled in by the applicant in the presence of 
the Government Medical Attendant, or 
Medical Practitioner. 

Identification marks: 

1 . 

2. 

I, Dr.aftercareful 

examination of the case certify hereby 

that.whose signature is given 

above is suffering from.and I 

consider that a period of absence from duty of 

.with effect from . 

.is absolutely necessary for the restoration 


of his health. 

I, Dr.after careful 

examination of the case certify hereby 

that.on restoration of health is now fit 

to join service. 

Place. Signature of medical 

attendant. 

Date. Registration 

No. 

(Medical Council of 
India/State Medical 
Council of 
.State) 


Note: The nature and probable duration of the 
illness should also be specified. This certificate 
must be accompanied by a brief resume of the case 
giving the nature of the illness, its symptoms, causes 
and duration. 


APPENDIX-3 

Format for Medical Record 

(see Regulation 3.1) 

Name of the patient : 

Age : 

Sex : 

Address : 

Occupation : 

Date of 1st visit : 

Clinical note 

(summary) of 

the case : 

Prov.: Diagnosis : 

Investigations 
advised with 

reports : 

Diagnosis after 
investigation : 

Advice : 

Follow up : 

Observations : 

Date 

Signature in 

full. 

Name of Treating 
Physician. 

APPENDIX-4 

List of Certificates, Reports, Notifications, etc. 
Issued by Doctors for the Purposes of Various 
Acts/Administrative Requirements 

(a) Under the Acts relating to Birth, Death or 
Disposal of the Dead. 

(b) Under the Acts relating to Lunacy and 
Mental Deficiency and under the Mental 
Illness Act and the Rules made thereunder. 

(c) Under the Vaccination Acts and the 
Regulations made thereunder. 

(d) Under the Factory Acts and the Regulations 
made thereunder. 

(e) Under the Education Acts. 


CFMT-25 (3rd Proof).p65 


214 


8/16/07, 11:08 AM 








































Law in Relation to Medical Practice: Part I 215 


(f) Under the Public Health Acts and the orders 
made thereunder. 

(g) Under the Workmen’s Compensation Act 
and persons under Disability Act. 

(h) Under the Acts and Orders relating to the 
notification of infectious diseases. 

(i) Under the Employee’s State Insurance Act. 

(j) In connection with sick benefit insurance 
and friendly societies. 

(k) Under the Merchant Shipping Act. 

(l) For procuring/issuing of passports. 

(m) For excusing attendance in courts of justice, 
in public services, in public offices or in 
ordinary employment. 

(n) In connection with Civil and Military 
matters. 

(o) In connection with matters under the control 
of Department of Pensions. 

(p) In connection with quarantine rules. 

(q) For Procuring Driving Ficence. 

ETHICAL GUIDELINES FOR BIOMEDICAL 
RESEARCH ON HUMAN SUBJECT-ICMR 
CODE 

Indian Council of Medical Research has prescribed 
general principles in biomedical research on human 
subjects, commonly known as ICMR code to be 
followed by all scientists working in India. It is 
binding on all scientists and action can be taken if 
someone violates it. It consists of following: 

1. Statement of general principles on research 
using human subjects in biomedical 
research. 

2. Statement of specific principles on research 
using human subjects in specific areas of 
biomedical research. 


The ICMR code defines that research on 
human subjects should be with the purpose to 
increase knowledge and should be conducted in a 
proper manner. Informed consent should be taken. 
While conducting research, exploitation should not 
be done and proper safety methods for the health 
of human subject should be taken. ICMR code 
provides for establishment of IEC (Institutional 
Ethics Committee) to supervise and regulate 
research in a research institute. The confidentiality 
of patients should be maintained. Specific 
principles of clinical evaluation of drugs/ vaccines/ 
devices/diagnostics/herbal remedies have been 
described in detail. Specific principles for 
epidemiological studies have been dealt with in 
detail. Guidelines of human genetic research have 
also been detailed. Other specific principles 
included are for research in transplantation 
including foetal tissue transplantation. Creation of 
human being for transplantation purposes is 
banned. 

USE OF RED CROSS EMBLEM 

It has been seen that all over India, anyone who is 
associated with health services uses the Red Cross 
emblem. This may not be unethical but it is illegal. 
As per the Geneva Convention Act 1960 to which 
India is a signatory, Section 12 prohibits the use of 
Red Cross emblem and all other allied emblems 
for any purpose whatsoever, without approval from 
the Government of India. Only members of medical 
division of armed forces of a country are authorised 
to use Red Cross emblem (a red cross on a white 
background). I think the Government of India 
should issue clear guidelines in this regard to stop 
its misuse as it is misused by chemists, paramedical 
staff and all hospital employees all over India. 


CFMT-25 (3rd Proof).p65 


215 


8/16/07, 11:08 AM 


















CHAPTER 

Law in Relation to Medical 
Practice: Part II 


MEDICAL NEGLIGENCE 

Medical negligence was previously called 
malpractice. Although both words are synonyms 
but they do not mean the same. Malpractice 
includes other forms of irregular medical practice. 
Majority of the cases of medical negligence are civil 
in nature while some of them may amount to be 
criminal in nature. 

Medical negligence is defined as breach of duty 
owed by a doctor to his patient to exercise 
reasonable degree of skill and care. 

For medical negligence to be proved, the 
following must be there: 

• The doctor owed a duty of care to the patient. 

• There was a breach of the duty. 

• The patient suffered a damage. 

Doctor-patient Relationship 

Once a doctor-patient relationship has been 
established, doctor cannot take the plea of not 
owning the duty of care. It is immaterial whether 
professional fee has been paid or not. The moment 
the patient enters the clinic of the doctor and doctor 
starts examining the patient, the duty begins. Even 
in charitable hospitals where no money is charged, 
a doctor can be charged of medical negligence. Not 
charging a professional fee does not protect the 
doctor from criminal negligence. 


Duty to Exercise Reasonable Degree of Skill 
and Care 

It is expected of the doctor that once he has obtained 
requisite qualification, he is expected to acquire 
skill to treat the patient and exercise good care. 
Degree of skill and care is not defined but it is 
assumed that he will exercise reasonable degree of 
skill and care. He may not be the best in the 
community of doctors but it is assumed that he is 
average and his expertise should be at least average 
in his peer group. It is also understood that a doctor 
may not always be knowing the latest in his field 
but it is expected that he is aware of new techniques 
that are coming to his specialty. A doctor is not 
hable if there is any error of judgement in diagnosis 
or treatment. 

Damage Suffered by a Patient 

A patient can charge the doctor only if he has 
suffered damage. If no damage has occurred, no 
case of negligence can be made. Damages are of 
the following kinds: 

1. Loss of Earnings: It may be due to enforced 
medical rest or temporary/ permanent 
impairment of his ability to carry out his 
occupation. It may be possible that the 
patient he might have to change the nature 
of his job or profession which may reduce 
his earnings. 


CFMT-26 (3rd Proof).p65 


216 


8/14/07, 4:01 PM 


















Law in Relation to Medical Practice: Part II 217 


2. Expenses: Patient may claim that he has 
paid more to the doctor than he deserved. 

3. Reduction in Expectation of Life. 

4. Reduced Pleasure of Life: This may occare 
due to psychic reasons or physical disability 


2. Failure to do suction in the case of 
unconscious patient may cause aspiration. 

3. Failure to monitor foetal heart rate can cause 
foetal death. 

4. Failure in resuscitation may cause death. 


caused by the doctor during treatment, e.g. 
loss of sexual pleasure due to negligent 
surgery of penis or vagina. 

5. Physical or Mental Suffering. 

6 . Death : Patient ’ s relative may claim that due 
to negligent action of the doctor, the patient 
has died. 

Types of Medical Negligence 

They are of the following two types: 

1. Civil Negligence: When a patient demands 
monetary compensation for the damage 
suffered, it is called civil medical negligence. 
For this, the patient can approach civil court 
or consumer redressal forum. 

2. Criminal Negligence: When a patient or his 
relative approaches the police to take action 
against the doctor for the damages he has 
caused to him, it is called criminal negligence. 

In death cases, most of the cases are registered 
against the doctor in Section 304A of the I.PC. 
Sometimes, cases are also registered under Sections 
325 and 302 of the I.P.C. 

How can the Negligence be Caused? 

The damages to the patient can be caused by act of 
Omission and act of Commission. 

Act of Omission 

Failure to exercise reasonable degree of care can 
cause damage to the patient. The following 
examples may illustrate the acts of omission: 

1. Failure to give proper post-operative care 
may result in death/damage due to sudden 
fall of blood pressure, cardiac arrest, etc. 


Act of Commission 

If a patient suffers damages due to direct effect of 
treatment, it amounts to an act of commission. 
There are certain situations where the doctrine of 
res ipsa loquitar is applied, which means ‘it speaks 
for itself’. The following are the examples: 

1. Presence of operative instrument in the 
abdomen/chest. 

2. Operation on wrong limb/eye. 

3. Wrong or fatal dosages of drugs/anaesthetic 
agents. 

To prove the doctrine of res ipsa loquitar, 
the following components should be there: 

• The damage/injury could not have been 
produced without treatment taken. 

• Patient has not contributed to 
negligence. 

• Doctor was in exclusive control of 
circumstances. 

Contributory Negligence 

When a patient contributes toward negligence, it is 
called contributory negligence. In this, both doctor 
and patient contribute toward negligence suffered 
by the patient. Common examples of contributory 
negligence are given below: 

1. When a patient does not give proper history 
of anaphylaxis/drug reaction on being asked 
by the doctor and later he suffers damages 
due to this on the prescription of such drug. 

2. Failure to take medicines as prescribed by 
the doctor may cause brain haemorrhage in 
a hypertensive subject. 

3. Early movements in a case of fracture may 
cause re-fracture. 


CFMT-26 (3rd Proof).p65 


217 


8/14/07, 4:01 PM 


















218 Concise Textbook of Forensic Medicine and Toxicology 


4. Wrong medication in wrong dosages taken 
by the patient himself may cause damages. 
Contributory negligence is a good plea for 
the doctor in a case of negligence. But 
burden of proving contributory negligence 
lies on the doctor himself. 

Corporate Negligence 

It is possible that the damage suffered by the patient 
may be due to hospital/nursing home where he is 
receiving treatment. In such cases, the doctor has 
no role to play. The following examples may be 
there: 

1. Patient may fall from stairs due to defective 
steps and may sustain injuries. 

2. Patient may fall from stretcher/wheel chair 
due to fault in the carrier. 

3. Patient’s care is affected as a result of 
inadequate number of nurses/paramedical 
staff. 

4. Hospital may not have sufficient 
infrastructure to manage the patient and 
hence patient suffered damages. 

Products Liability 

Sometimes, patient can get damages as a result of 
faulty instruments, faulty injection set or use of 
inadequate drugs. In such cases, doctor who is using 
such instruments or drugs may not be aware that 
they are faulty. 

Examples of this nature are: 

• Patient may get electrocuted while cautery 
is being done. 

• Patient may get severe burns because of 
leakage of hot water from hot packs. 

• Injection vial containing the desired drug 
may not have proper drug or proper 
concentration. 

• Suction apparatus may not be working 
properly. In all such cases, the liability of 
negligence would lie on companies 
manufacturing such instrument or the drug 


vials. But hospital can also be held 
responsible if it is seen that hospital has not 
taken adequate steps for repair/ maintenance 
of such instrument. Hospital can also be 
sued if proper maintenance of drug vials is 
not followed. 

Novus Actus Interveniens 

(Latin: ‘a new intervening act’) 

Rarely it is reported that damages have occurred 
due to a new action which intervenes the treatment. 
In such cases, the concerned doctor is not held 
responsible, as he had no control over the 
circumstances. The unexpected unforeseen 
circumstances must not have been thought of by 
the doctor. The following are its examples: 

• A patient who is in a condition of shock is 
being operated and suddenly due to 
earthquake, a piece of ceiling falls over the 
patient and he dies. 

• An ambulance carrying a serious patient 
may get involved in road traffic accident and 
the patient may die. 

Vicarious Responsibility 

It means responsibility of respondeat superior 
(Latin: iet the superior reply’). In this, liability for 
negligence lies on the master or employer. In law, 
the master is held responsible for the negligent acts 
of his servants within the scope of employment but 
is not liable if he has employed an independent 
person to do something. Accordingly, hospitals are 
liable for the negligent actions of its paramedical 
staff and full-time junior medical staff. Hospital is 
not responsible for the negligent actions of honorary 
consultants as they do not come under purview of 
employment. 

Comparative Negligence 

It is a new concept in medical negligence especially 
involving contributory negligence. In this, it is seen 
that how much a patient has contributed to 
negligence and damages are awarded keeping in 


CFMT-26 (3rd Proof).p65 


218 


8/14/07, 4:01 PM 


















Law in Relation to Medical Practice: Part II 219 


view the patient’s role. In such cases, the quantum 
of award would depend upon the ratio of the doctor’s 
and the patient’s negligence. If both have contributed 
50 per cent each, no compensation may be awarded. 

Defence Against an Allegation of Negligence 

The following may be considered as three possible 
avenues for defence: 

1. Delegation of Duties: In this case, the 
doctor who is sued takes the plea that 
negligence that occurred was not due to him 
but by others whom he has delegated duty 
like anaesthetist, surgeon, etc. It is 
sometimes difficult for the patient to know 
whom to sue, and in these cases the onus of 
refutation would fall on all concerned. 

2. Contributory Negligence: The doctor can 
take the defence of contributory negligence 
but in law, he has to prove that the patient 
has contributed toward negligence. It is quite 
difficult. But if he can show some amount 
of contribution by the patient, he might have 
to pay less compensation. 

3 . Consent of the Patient: It may be contested 
that the patient has willingly assumed the 
risk of events actually taking place. This is 
called doctrine of volenti non fit injuria. It 
is best described in sports like boxing, motor 
racing, etc., where if any damage occurs, 
there can be no claim. The same principle 
is applied in medical treatment where doctor 
can take plea that incidence of expected 
injuries was explained to the patient and he 
has willingly taken the risk. This is a good 
defence if the patient has refused to take 
completely full course of the treatment. 
Proof of refusal by the patient should be 
obtained in writing if possible, otherwise 
such a remark must be made in case sheets. 

Guidelines to Avoid Negligence Suites 

Negligence suites can be avoided by following the 
below mentioned guidelines: 


1. Always obtain informed consent in writing. 

2. Always keep a file of laws related to medical 
practice in office. 

3. Employ only qualified assistants. 

4. Have routine checking of all instruments for 
proper functioning and wiring. 

5. Do not keep technic al medic al literature within 
the reach of the patients. Misunderstanding 
can occur through misinterpretation. 

6. Do not give any diagnosis on telephone. 

7. Do not prescribe medicine without 
examination of the patient. 

8. Do not ever guarantee results. 

9. Keep everything confidential and do not 
show medical records to anyone without the 
patient’s permission. 

10. Never abandon your patient. 

11. Do not argue over charges. Settle it 
amicably. If patient does not pay, if possible, 
forget it. 

12. Have sympathy with the patient. Accept the 
patient as a ‘whole’. 

13. Do not lie, threaten or commit fraud in your 
relationship with the patient. 

14. Do not criticise any patient or your 
colleague in the presence of other patients. 

15. Medico-legal cases should not be refused 
treatment. 

16. The most important is to talk to the patient 
and his relatives. Never assume that patient 
knows it. 

CONSUMER PROTECTION ACT 

Consumer Protection Act, 1986 was introduced with 
the purpose to provide relief to the consumer against 
erring traders and manufacturers. It was envisaged 
at that time that there is a need of protection of 
consumer from wrong business practices. The Act 
was intended to provide cheap and speedy trial for 
consumer benefit, as it was found that civil courts 
are already burdened with heavy work and thus 
unable to provide speedy justice. 

Law defines the obligations of manufacturers 
and traders. Any consumer who feels that the 


CFMT-26 (3rd Proof).p65 


219 


8/14/07, 4:01 PM 


















220 Concise Textbook of Forensic Medicine and Toxicology 


service is not provided to him for which he has 
paid is entitled for relief. 

Under the Act, Forums have been established 
at district level, state level and national level. 

1. District Forum (Consumer Forum): In 

every district of the country, district forums 
are created. The district forum has three 
members. The Chairman is either a sitting 
district and session judge or a retired one. 
Others are two eminent citizens, one being 
a lady. The district forum can award a 
compensation of up to Rs. 20 lakhs. 

2. State Level Forum: Commonly called the 
State Consumer Redressal Commission, it 
has been set up at state level. It is presided 
over by a sitting High Court judge or a 
retired one. Others are two prominent 
citizens, one being a lady member. Appeals 
against the judgements of the District 
Consumer Forum are heard in the State 
Consumer Redressal Commission. The state 
commission can award compensation of up 
to Rs. One crore. 

3. National Level Forum: In New Delhi, 
there is a National Consumer Redressal 
Commission which is presided over by a 
sitting Supreme Court judge or a retired one. 
Other members are prominent citizens, one 
being a lady member. Appeals against 
judgements of the State Consumer 
Redressal Commissions are heard in this 
forum. The commission can award any 
amount of compensation. Appeal against the 
judgements of the National Consumer 
Redressal Commission can be filed only in 
the Supreme Court. 

Procedure of Filing a Complaint 

The procedure of filing a complaint against a 
deficiency of service by a trader is very simple. 
There is no need of a lawyer. No court fee is 
required. Application on a plain paper is sufficient 
along with a copy of the goods purchased. It was 
envisaged at that time that judgement would be 


given in 90 days, but now even in consumer forums 
there is a lot of pendency which results in inordinate 
delay. 

The complaint has to be filed within 2 years of 
the cause of action. But the court has the power to 
admit the case even after 2 years if it finds reasons 
of delay condonable. 

The Act allows provisions for establishing 
consumer protection councils at state and central 
level working for the promotion and protection of 
the rights of the consumer. 

Consumer Protection Act and Medical 
Profession 

Initially, medical profession was not included in 
the ambit of Consumer Protection Act as it was 
thought that medical care is not covered under 
concept of ‘service’. It was also thought that since 
the behaviour of the body is unpredictable even in 
the best of circumstances, common risks of medical 
profession can be misinterpreted and challenged 
unnecessarily. 

On 13.11.1995, the Supreme Court of India in 
its judgement in Civil Appeal No. 688 of 1993 in a 
case of Indian Medical Association vs V.P. Shantha 
& others held that medical practitioner can be sued 
for compensation under Consumer Protection Act, 
1986 for any act of negligence. The Court held that 
services rendered by doctors and hospitals are 
covered in the “service” as defined under Section 
2(1)(0) of the Consumer Protection Act, 1986. 

Following are the salient features of the 
judgement. 

1. Hospitals and doctors which render service 
without any charge whatsoever to every person 
availing the service would not fall under the 
purview of “service.” 

2. If a hospital is charging a token amount for 
registration but providing free services to 
everyone, it would not be covered under the 
Act. 

3. Services rendered by doctors and hospitals 
or nursing homes on payment basis fall 
under the ambit of the Act. 


CFMT-26 (3rd Proof).p65 


220 


8/14/07, 4:01 PM 


















Law in Relation to Medical Practice: Part II 221 


4. Doctors and hospitals or nursing homes 
which provide free service to some of the 
patients belonging to poor class but the bulk 
of the service is rendered to the patient on 
payment basis are also covered under the 
Act. 

5. When a person has taken an insurance 
policy for medical treatment whereunder all 
the charges for consultations, diagnosis and 
medical treatment are borne by an insurance 
company, a person receiving the treatment 
is beneficiary of the service which has been 
rendered by medical practitioner, the 
payment for which would be met by 
insurance company under the insurance 
policy. The service rendered to him by the 
medical practitioner would not be free of 
charge and would, therefore, constitute 
service as defined in the Act. 

6. Government hospitals/dispensaries where 
services are rendered on payment of charges 
and also rendered free of charges to other 
persons availing such services would fall 
under the ambit of the Act. 

7. Services rendered free in government 
hospitals/dispensaries will not be covered 
within the ambit of the Act. Therefore, such 
government doctors/hospitals or 
dispensaries would be outside the purview 
of consumer forum. However, the services 
paid for, like pathological, radiological and 
other diagnostic procedures for which a fee 
is charged by the hospital will fall within 
the ambit of this Act. 

8. Services rendered at AIIMS, New Delhi; 
PGIMER, Chandigarh, etc., which are being 
paid for, are also covered within the ambit 
of the Act. 

Post-inclusion Scenario of Medical 
Profession in Consumer Protection Act, 1986 

After inclusion of medical profession, a lot of hue 
and cry was raised, but slowly doctors are realising 
that it may be beneficial in the long run. As patients 


are now more aware of their rights, they would also 
be in a position to understand doctors’ viewpoint. 
The Act would also help in curbing the activities 
of quacks or pseudo-doctors. It is hoped that it 
would bring more control over substandard care 
and substandard instruments. It will result in the 
enhancement of levels of patient care. It would 
make doctors more responsive to their patients. 

Some feel otherwise. They think it would 
increase the cost of medical treatment as doctors 
would go for defensive medicine and thus would 
opt for more and more investigations for which the 
patient would be paying. Some feel that doctors 
would hesitate in taking bold steps and would rely 
on conservatism. 

I personally feel that by the inclusion of 
medical profession into the ambit of Consumer 
Protection Act, 1986, now there would be more trust 
and transparency in doctor-patient relationship. 
There would be an increase in the standards of 
medical care, which in a long run would benefit 
the society. Let us see how things work in future. 

Medical Indemnity Insurance 

It is an insurance plan offered now by various 
insurance companies to doctors, nursing homes, or 
hospitals to pay compensation to patients when 
legally imposed by consumer court or civil court 
in cases of negligence. The doctor who buys 
insurance plan pays premium to the insurance 
companies every year. The premium varies 
according to the specialties. Surgeons and 
anaesthetists have to pay more as compared to 
physicians as chances of litigations are higher in 
these two specialties. 

Now certain medical defense unions have also 
come into force. They offer all kinds of support in 
case of medical negligence. It involves preparing 
defence, hiring lawyers to defend and liaison with 
insurance companies. Some medico-legal 
consultants are also giving professional help on 
charge basis in cases of medical negligence. 


CFMT-26 (3rd Proof).p65 


221 


8/14/07, 4:01 PM 


















CHAPTER 

Recent Advances in Crime 
Detection 


Nowadays, in the era of terrorism and high profile 
crime, it is essential that science keeps pace with 
newer methods of crimes and helps the 
investigating team in obtaining some vital 
information about the accused, suspects and 
informants. The following techniques are recent 
ones and are being used all over the world. These 
techniques are now available in India as well and 
have been adopted in many cases: 

1. Polygraph or Lie Detector Test: This method 
was invented by Dr. John Larson, USA in 1921. It 
is based on the fact that there are changes in the 
body which occur when a person lies and these 
changes can be effectively documented. In this 
process, the subject is made to lie on a bed and a 
lot of sensors are attached to his body. These sensors 
measure changes in breathing, blood pressure, 
pulse, respiratory rate and sweating. During this 
process, the subject is asked some standard 
questions (also called control questions) which are 
correct and then his responses are recorded on a 
polygraph. Then actual questions are asked which 
are mixed with fillers and the person’s response 
to these questions is documented. It has been 
generally found that if a person is lying, his blood 
pressure and heart rate increase along with high 
perspiration. The person’s response to some fillers 
is also documented. Since all these responses are 
recorded on a polygraph, it is also called 
‘polygraph test’. Usually the subject’s 


examination lasts about 2 hours. This test is quite 
important in cases of non-habituated criminals but 
it fails in highly determined and highly motivated 
criminals as they can speak lie very easily. No 
permission is needed from the court to conduct 
this study. The findings of this test are not 
admissible in the court of law but can provide leads 
to the investigating agencies. 

2. Narco-analysis or Truth Serum Test: In 1930s, 
a number of psychiatrists started analysing patients 
after giving drugs to them. This induced a state of 
sleep in them which decreased the effectiveness of 
the patients in controlling their conscious stage. The 
term narco-analysis was coined as the drugs were 
narcotics or sleep inducers. 

This test is performed under the supervision 
of an anaesthetist and clinical psychologist. The 
fitness of the subject is evaluated by anaesthetist— 
whether drug can be administered to him or not. 
His physical examination is documented. Sodium 
pantothenol or sodium amytal, which is commonly 
used in hospital practice to induce anaesthesia, is 
administered in low doses. This drug causes 
sedation just like alcohol and the person becomes 
talkative and less inhibited. His ability to hide truth 
decreases. Now a set of questions are asked to him 
in a controlled manner. His responses are recorded 
via sound recorder. Most of the time, the subject is 
able to reveal the truth as his guilt complex 
decreases. 


CFMT-27 (3rd Proof).p65 


222 


8/12/07, 9:41 AM 


















Recent Advances in Crime Detection 223 


This test can be performed only with the 
permission of the court and the subject himself as 
nobody can be forced to give evidence against 
himself. The report of this test is not admissible in 
the court of law but it can provide leads to the 
investigating team to reach the truth. The test is 
controversial but has been performed in many cases 
in recent past. 

3. Brain Mapping or Brain finger printing: In 

late 1980s in USA, Institute of Medicine of the 
National Academy of Science started evaluating 
the importance of integrating neuroscientific 
information by MRI, EEG, positron emission 
tomography (PET) and other non-invasive 
scanning techniques to map anatomy, psychology, 
perfusion, function and phenotypes of human 
brain. The brain mapping was started for study of 
memory, learning, aging and drug effects 
especially in schizophrenics, autistics and 
depressed people. This led to the establishment 
of the human brain project and later international 
consortium on brain mapping evolved. 

Now this technique is used in crime detection 
also. It is based on the principle that by showing 
images and words associated with the case, the 
investigator wants to know if the subject has 
memories about the case. When a subject is shown 
an image or words associated with the case, a wave 
known as P300 is generated (the name is so given 
because the wave is generated 300 millisecond after 
the images or words are shown). This P300 wave 
can be documented. This test is non-invasive. This 
test was patented in 2001 by Lawrence Farwell. 
USA. The subject is made to sit on a chair and a 
band containing six to seven neurosensors is 
attached. First the control experiments are done. 
Then the subject is shown images, words or 


incidents related to the case, and his responses are 
recorded. If a person has seen these images, P300 
wave is generated. The test usually takes 5-6 hours. 
Permission from the court is not needed. The results 
are not admissible in court of law but can provide 
leads to the investigative agencies to solve the case. 
This test has been done in many cases in recent 
past like in Telgi case. 

4. Hypnosis: Hypnosis is a trance stage induced 
by suggestion. In this, the subject is given 
commands to relax, and slowly by giving 
suggestions, he is taken to a deep sleep stage, where 
his unconscious mind can be probed. During the 
entire stage, the subject remains conscious. This 
test can be done only with the active help of the 
subject. This test is quite useful in investigation of 
cases where information is sought from persons 
who witnessed the crime instead of committing it. 
It may help them giving details about the persons 
who committed the crime. The report of this test is 
also not admissible in court of law but can provide 
leads to the investigators about the persons who 
committed the crime. 

5. Writing Analysis or Graphology: ‘Graphology’ 
or ‘handwriting analysis’ is done to know the 
genuineness of documents and to create 
psychological profile of the person concerned. It 
is also used in various industries to know about an 
employee’s character. The report of this is 
admissible in court of law in many cases of forged 
documents. 

6. Voice Stress Test: It is based on the principle 
that when a subject is lying, there are changes in 
his voice patterns which can be documented 
objectively. No consent of the individual is required 
but its report is not admissible in court of law. 


CFMT-27 (3rd Proof).p65 


223 


8/12/07, 9:41 AM 


















224 Concise Textbook of Forensic Medicine and Toxicology 


FORENSIC SLIDES 




Plate 1: Note tattoo mark on the 
body. (Reference chapter 3) 


Plate 2: Post-mortem staining on 
body. (Reference chapter 4) 




Plate 3: Normal brain after removal 
from skull. (Reference chapter 4) 


Plate 4: Body showing putrefaction. 
(Reference chapter 5) 



Plate 5: Strangulation mark on neck. 
(Reference chapter 9) 


Plate 6: Charred body. 
(Reference chapter 11) 


CFMT-27 (3rd Proof).p65 


224 


8/12/07, 9:42 AM 





























Forensic Slides 225 



Plate 7: Amputation and crushing of 
leg due to road side accident. 
(Reference chapter 12) 


Plate 8: Fire-arm injury. 
(Reference chapter 13) 




Plate 9: Multiple abrasions on body 
due to roadside accident. 
(Reference chapter 13) 


Plate 10: Rupture of head due to road 
traffic accident. 

(Reference chapter 16) 


CFMT-27 (3rd Proof).p65 


225 


8/12/07, 9:42 AM 































CFMT-27 (3rd Proof).p65 


226 


8/12/07, 9:42 AM 



Section 2 

TOXICOLOGY 


CFMT-28 (3rd Proof).p65 


227 


8/12/07, 9:42 AM 



















CFMT-28 (3rd Proof).p65 


228 


8/12/07, 9:42 AM 



CHAPTER 

28 

Medico-legal Aspects of Poisons 


DEFINITION OF TOXICOLOGY 

The toxicology is defined as science which deals 
with knowledge of source, character and properties 
of poisons, their symptoms in the body, their 
pharmacological actions and treatment. 

Definition of Poison 

Poison is a substance introduced in the body to 
produce ill-effect, disease or death. It may be of 
any origin like synthetic, mineral, animal or 
vegetable. It may be introduced through any route 
like mouth, nostril, anus, vagina, ears, eyes, or by 
injection or inhalation. 

Definition of Drug 

Drug is defined as any substance to be introduced 
in the human body for diagnosis, investigation, 
treatment or prevention of any disease. 

LAWS RELATING TO POISONS 

The following are the laws related to poisons: 

1. Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic 
Substances (NDPS) Act: This was 
promulgated in 1985. A narcotic drug is 
defined as cocoa leaves, cannabis, opium, 
poppy straw and all manufactured drugs. 
The ‘manufactured drug’ means all cocoa 
derivatives, medicinal cannabis, opium 


derivatives, poppy straw concentrate and 
any other narcotic substance or preparation 
which the Central Government may 
include by notification in the list. A 
‘psychotropic substance’ is defined as any 
substance natural or synthetic, or any 
preparation which is included in the list of 
psychotropic substance. It contains a list 
of 77 psychotropic substances. The Act 
provides severe punishment for the person 
possessing narcotic drugs. The Act 
differentiates between the user and the 
trafficker. It provides for less punishment 
for user who is in possession drugs for his 
own use. It views user with sympathy. To 
differentiate between the user and the 
trafficker the quantities of drugs in 
possession is defined differently for each 
drug. The offence in NDPS Act for 
traffickers is non-bailable and severe 
sentences are common. 

2. The Drug Act, 1940: The purpose of this 
Act was to regulate import, manufacture, 
distribution and sale of drugs like patent or 
proprietary medicines, vaccines, sera, 
toxins, antitoxins, antigen, other biological 
products like vitamins, hormones and drugs 
commonly used for external or internal 
consumption. Later, insecticides, 
disinfectants and contraceptives were added. 
This Act was later changed to Drugs and 
Cosmetics Act, 1940 to include cosmetics. 


CFMT-28 (3rd Proof).p65 


229 


8/12/07, 9:42 AM 



















230 Concise Textbook of Forensic Medicine and Toxicology 


The cosmetic was defined in this Act as 
“Any article intended to be rubbed, poured, 
sprinkled or sprayed on, or introduced into, 
or otherwise applied to, the human body or 
any part thereof for cleansing, beautifying, 
promoting attractiveness or altering the 
appearance, and include any article intended 
for use as component of cosmetics. 

This Act was later amended to include 
Ayurvedic and Unani drugs. Under this Act, 
medicines are classified into Schedule H and 
Schedule L. 

Schedule H contains list of poisons which 
can be sold only on prescription of a 
registered medical practitioner and these 
substances are labelled with the words 
“SCHEDULE ‘H’ DRUG” Warning - “To 
be sold by retail on the prescription of 
registered medical practitioner only”. 
Schedule L contains a list of antibiotics, 
antihistaminic and other chemotherapeutic 
agents of recent origin. These substances are 
also labelled as “SCHEDULE *L’ DRUGS” 
Warning “To be sold by retail on the 
prescription of a registered medical 
practitioner only.” 

The prescription of a registered medical 
practitioner must be in writing, and signed by 
him with date. Name and address of the patient 
must be given. Total amount of medicine and 
dose should be clearly mentioned. 

3. Pharmacy Act, 1948: The purpose of this 
act is to make better provision for the 
regulation of the profession of pharmacy 
and setting up of ‘Pharmacy Councils’. 
Under this act, Central Pharmacy Council 
was established which has control over 
education and examination of students 
entering pharmacy. The State Councils have 
also been constituted under this act. 

MEDICO-LEGAL ASPECTS OF POISONING 

Poisoning in India is quite common. There are 
instances of human and cattle poisoning. Cattle 


poisoning is mostly intentional to kill the cattle of 
the neighbour. Human poisoning can be accidental, 
suicidal or homicidal: 

1. Accidental Poisoning: Most of the 
poisoning is accidental. In children most 
of the poisoning is accidental as they 
consume tablets or syrup in the household 
accidentally. Accidental poisoning can 
occur in agricultural workers when 
spraying insecticides. It can occur if a 
person drinks unsafe water contaminated 
with arsenic, etc. 

2. Suicidal Poisoning: Nowadays, suicides 
by poisoning is very common among 
farmers, especially in Andhra Pradesh and 
Punjab. They consume insecticides when 
they are unable to pay agricultural loans. 
Aluminium phosphide and 
organophosphorus compounds are first 
choice followed by organochrolo 
compounds. Suicide by poisoning is also 
common in housewives. 

3. Homicidal Poisoning: Poison is very 
commonly used for homicides, especially 
on young children who are done away with 
this easily. Arsenic is commonly used 
followed by opium, aconite, dhatura, 
strychnine and potassium cyanide. If the 
intention is not to kill but rob, stupefying 
agents like dhatura, Cannabis indica or 
chloral hydrate are used. 

CLASSIFICATION OF POISONS 

Poisons are classified according to the symptoms 
which they produce in the body. Generally, poisons 
are classified as follows: 

Classification 1: Based on Structure 

1. Corrosives: Strong acids and alkalis. 

2. Irritants: They may be of three types: 


CFMT-28 (3rd Proof).p65 


230 


8/12/07, 9:42 AM 


















Medico-legal Aspects of Poisons 231 


(a) Inorganic 

(i) Non-metallic: Phosphorus, chlorine, 
bromine, iodine, etc. 

(ii) Metallic: Arsenic, antimony, mercury, 
copper, lead, etc. 

(b) Organic 


3. Through application on skin, mucous 
membrane like mouth, vagina, anus, nose. 

4. Through injection like intramuscular or 
intravenous. 

5. On application on injuries like abrasion, cut 
wounds or lacerated wounds. 

ROUTES OF ELIMINATION 


(i) Vegetable: Castor oil seeds, croton oil, 
Madar. 

(ii) Animal: Snakes, insect bites, 
cantharides. 

(c) Mechanical: Glass, hair, diamonds, etc. 

Classification 2: Based on Area of Action 
and Method 

Systemic Poisons 

(a) CNS acting 

I. Affecting brain: 

(i) Somniferous: Opium, barbiturates, 
etc. 

(ii) Inebriant: Alcohol, ether, chloroform, 
etc. 

(iii) Deliriant: Dhatura, belladonna. 
Cannabis, etc. 

II. Affecting spinal cord: Nux vomica, etc. 

(b) Affecting peripheral nerve: Conium, 
Curare,etc.. 

(c) Cardiac poisons: Aconite, digitalis, 
oleander, tobacco, hydrocyanic acid, etc. 

(d) Asphyxiants: Carbon dioxide, carbon 
monoxide, coal gases, etc. 

ROUTES OF ADMINISTRATION 

The following are the routes of administration of 
poisons: 

1. Oral, i.e. through mouth. 

2. Through inhalation, i.e. by nose/mouth. 


The following are the routes of elimination of 
poison from the body after metabolism: 

1. Urine and faeces are the commonest. 

2. Elimination through breast milk. 

3. Secretion into saliva or stomach. 

4. Elimination through respired air from the 
lungs. 

ACTION OF POISON 

The actions of poisons on the body are classified as: 

1. Local 

2. Remote 

3. Systemic 

4. General. 

When the poison acts on the site of application 
it is called local effect. Sometimes, poisons may 
act at a particular place like liver or kidney, then it 
may be called remote or remote local effect. When 
a poison affects a particular system like CNS, 
cardiovascular or GI tract, its effects are called 
systemic. When multiple organ systems are 
affected, the effects are called general. It may be 
possible that poison may affect in more than one 
way like local and systemic too or affect all systems 
as in general effect. 

Factors Modifying Action of Poisons 

The following factors modify the action of poisons 
in the body: 


CFMT-28 (3rd Proof).p65 


231 


8/12/07, 9:42 AM 


















232 Concise Textbook of Forensic Medicine and Toxicology 


1. Quantity: It is a general rule that more the 
quantity of poison in the body, more will be 
its effect. But in some cases, too much of 
poison can also trigger vomiting which may 
throw out majority of the poison. A large 
quantity of poison may sometimes change 
the mode of action of the poison. Arsenic in 
large doses may cause death by shock while 
in small doses it may produce only 
gastrointestinal symptoms. 

2. Form: If a poison is administered in gaseous 
form it acts fastest, while solution acts faster 
than solid form. Sometimes, the effect of 
one poison may be countered by another 
poison which is also taken along with it. If 
somebody takes silver nitrate and 
hydrochloric acid together, he will not have 
any poisonous effect as both poisons would 
react with each other and produce 
nonpoisonous silver chloride. Solubility of 
the poison is also important as some poison 
may not be water soluble but may dissolve 
in acid secretion of the stomach. The action 
of poison may also be altered if an inert 
substance is mixed with poison as it may 
reduce absorption from the stomach. If a 
poison is highly diluted with water, it may 
not affect at all. 

3. Mode of Administration: If a poison is 
introduced into the body via gaseous route 
it acts the fastest. Parenteral route acts faster 
than oral route. The mode of administration 
should be appropriate for the desired effect. 
Snake venom is very poisonous if injected 
but harmless if taken by mouth. Application 
of poison on intact skin acts quite slow as 
compared to poison applied on mucous 
membrane. 

4. Condition of the Body: It has been found 
that less doses of poison is required for 
children and old people as compared to 
young adults. Males tolerate poison better 
than females. The body may have 
anaphylactic reaction with any drug or 


poison and death may be reported even with 
small doses. Allergies are genetically 
inherited and may run in families. If a person 
is already habituated to a particular poison 
like alcohol, opium, dhatura or barbiturates, 
etc., he may be able to tolerate higher doses 
as compared to a normal non-addicted 
person. Drug reaction may occur in body 
and may potentiate the effect of poison or 
render it useless. The sedative, hypnotic 
drugs have positive potentiating effect on 
level of alcohol once taken. A healthy person 
can tolerate poison better than a sick person 
or persons having systemic disorders like 
hypertension, or diabetes. 

FEATURES OF POISONING 
Features of Poisoning in Living 

It depends upon the nature of poison taken by the 
person to cause certain characteristics suggesting 
poisoning but generally following features may be 
seen: 

1. The onset of illness is sudden in a previously 
healthy person except in chronic poisoning 
in which it is insidious. 

2. The symptoms usually start within 1 hour 
of consumption of some food, water or drug, 
if the poison has been given by oral route. 

3. The symptoms start increasing and may 
cause severe bodily disorders even leading 
to death. Symptoms may start decreasing 
once a certain time is passed. 

4. It may be possible sometimes that persons 
who have consumed food or water along 
with a sick person may also show similar 
symptoms. 

5. The final proof of poisoning lies in detection 
of poison in blood, urine, vomits or faeces. 
Similar poison can also be detected in left 
over food or water. 


CFMT-28 (3rd Proof).p65 


232 


8/12/07, 9:42 AM 


















Medico-legal Aspects of Poisons 233 


Features of Poisoning in the Dead 

The poisoning in a dead person can be established 
by post-mortem findings, analysis of viscera and 
circumstantial evidence. 

1. Post-mortem Findings: The post-mortem 
should be done very carefully in cases of 
poisoning. There may be stains of poison 
on the body or on clothes. Some parts of 
vomitus may also be seen on clothes or on 
body. The colour of skin may also point 
toward the kind of poison. Cherry red 
appearance in cases of carbon monoxide 
poisoning may be seen. The skin may 
appear jaundiced in phosphorus poisoning. 
If corrosives have been taken, mouth or lips 
may show changes. Marks of injection may 
be seen if a poison has been given by 
injection. But in some poisoning cases, no 
external findings may be seen. 

The internal examination of the body 
may reveal the following features in the 
alimentary canal: 

(a) Congestion 

(b) Softening 

(c) Ulceration of mucous membrane 

(d) Perforation. 

Congestion: Congestion in the stomach is caused 
by all irritant poisons. It is more marked at cardiac 
end. It may appear in patches or may be diffused 
all over the mucous membrane. Congestion in 
intestine may be confused with post-mortem 
staining. Post-mortem staining is always present 
at the dependent portion of stomach/intestine while 
congestion may be uniform all over mucous 
membrane. 

Softening: Due to effect of corrosive poisons, the 
mucous membrane may be softened usually at 
cardiac end and greater curvature. In softening the 
mucosa is not detached. 

Ulceration: Corrosive or irritant poison can cause 
erosion of mucous membrane. The margins become 
thin and friable. 


Perforation: Perforation of the wall of stomach 
may be possible in sulphuric acid poisoning or other 
irritant poisoning. 

2. Viscera Analysis: It is very important to 
preserve viscera to establish poisoning. The 
whole stomach along with contents, part of 
small intestine with contents, part of liver, 
one half of each kidney and spleen (whole) 
along with samples of blood are preserved 
in saturated solution of common salt for 
viscera analysis. The qualitative and 
quantitative analysis of viscera must be done 
at the forensic sciences laboratory. 
Sometimes, the poison may not be detected 
in the viscera. It may be due to: 

(a) poison having already been extracted out 
by vomiting or gastric lavage. 

(b) poison having already been metabolised 
in the body and death may be due to 
other sequelae. In such cases, the clinical 
findings should be taken into 
consideration to decide the cause of 
death. 

3. Circumstantial Evidence: Sometimes, a 
bottle of poison may be detected from the 
site or parts of poison may be seen on 
clothes. Vomitus may be seen on the scene 
of crime. The suicide note may be found in 
some cases. 

GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF TREATMENT OF 
POISONING 

The general principles of poisoning are divided into 
two phases: 

1. Emergency management 

2. Treatment of poisoning 

Emergency Management 

Once a medical practitioner comes into contact with 
a patient of poisoning, he should immediately 
examine the patient carefully. A history of the 


CFMT-28 (3rd Proof).p65 


233 


8/12/07, 9:42 AM 


















234 Concise Textbook of Forensic Medicine and Toxicology 


illness should be taken and clinical assessment of 
the patient should be done immediately. If airways 
are blocked, they should be made clear either by 
suction or putting endotracheal tube. The blood 
pressure should be taken and immediately fluid/ 
blood should be started intravenously to raise blood 
pressure, if low. Assessment regarding 
consciousness should be made. 

Glasgow Coma Scale 

This scale is most commonly used in clinical 
practice to define the stage of coma. In this, eye 
response, motor response and verbal response are 
taken into consideration. Higher the scale by total 
count, higher is the level of consciousness. 

The scale is calculated as follows by totalling 
all scores in all the three features observed. The 
scale is described in format as E4 M2 V3. The coma 
score (E+M+V) varies from 3 to 14 showing deeply 
comatose to conscious (Table 28.1). 

There is another method of grading 
unconsciousness according to response to painful 
stimuli and following grades can be seen: 


Table 28.1 Glasgow comma scale 


Features observed 

Score 

1. Eye opening 

(a) Spontaneous 

E4 

(b) On speech 

E3 

(c) On pain 

E2 

(d) No response 

El 

2. Best motor response 

(a) Obeys all commands 

M5 

(b) Localises 

M4 

(c) Flex 

M3 

(d) Extends 

M2 

(e) Nil 

Ml 

3. Best verbal response 

(a) Oriented 

V5 

(b) Confused conversation 

V4 

(c) Inappropriate words 

V3 

(d) Incomprehensible sounds 

V2 

(e) Nil 

VI 


Grade I: Drowsy but responds to verbal 
command. 

Grade II: Unconscious but responds to 
minimum stimuli. 

Grade III: Unconscious but responds only to 
maximum painful stimuli. 

Grade IY: Unconscious and no response. 

The rubbing of the patient’s sternum with 
clenched fist is very painful and is commonly used 
as stimulus in clinical practice. 

Treatment of Poisoning 

Once the patient is stabilised by taking care of the 
respiratory system and shock, the treatment of 
poisoning should begin with following principles: 

1. Removal of unabsorbed poison from the 
body. 

2. Use of antidotes. 

3. Elimination of absorbed poison from the 
body. 

4. Treatment of general symptoms. 

Removal of Unabsorbed Poison from the Body 

If the poison has been given through inhalation, 
the patient should be immediately removed from 
the site of inhalation. After airways have been 
secured and made obstruction free, fresh oxygen 
should be given. If required, artificial respiration 
through ventilator can be given. 

If the poison has been given by injection as in 
snake bite, a tight ligature may be applied above 
the wound and the injected site should be cut open 
and poison may be sucked through a suction pump. 
It may be neutralised also by local application of 
antidote if available. 

If the poison has come into contact with the 
skin, mucous membrane, or thrown into eyes like 
corrosives or irritants, it should be washed with 
water or a suitable antidote. Thorough lavage 
should be done. 

If the poison has been taken through oral route, 
it should be removed by gastric lavage. 


CFMT-28 (3rd Proof).p65 


234 


8/12/07, 9:42 AM 





















Medico-legal Aspects of Poisons 235 


Gastric Lavage 

The gastric lavage should be done in conscious 
patients. If the patient is unconscious and gastric 
lavage has to be done, a cuffed endotracheal tube 
should be introduced so that nothing from 
oesophagus/stomach enters the airway. The gastric 
lavage is done by gastric lavage tube which is about 
1.5 metre, made of non-collapsible rubber tube, 
about 1 cm in diameter and has a funnel attached 
to it. Other tubes like Levine tube or Ryle’s tube 
can also be used. A mouth gag is there in the tube 
so that patient cannot bite the tube. The tube is 
lubricated with glycerine or olive oil, and is 
introduced into the mouth. The patient is asked to 
swallow it. Then, it should be introduced slowly 
so as to reach the stomach. Make sure that the tube 
is in stomach and not in trachea by pushing air 
through tube and listening the voice over abdomen 
by stethoscope. Patient should be on left side or 
prone with head hanging over the edge of the bed. 
Length of the tube to be inserted in adult is 50 cm, 
while in child it is 25 cm. About 300 ml of plain 
water or warm water should be poured into funnel 
keeping it high over abdomen. By gravity action, 
water will enter the stomach. Once it is reached, 
funnel is lowered and then kept below the level of 
abdomen. By siphon action, wash from the stomach 
would come out through funnel. 

The first washing should be preserved for 
chemical analysis. The stomach wash should be 
done till a clear solution of water is obtained. The 
gastric lavage is very useful if it is done within 2 to 
4 hours of ingestion in most cases but in cases of 
certain drugs like salicylates, phenothiazines, 
antidepressants, etc., it can be of help in even up to 
12-18 hours of poisoning. 

1. Contraindications 

(a) Corrosives except carbolic acid 

(b) Convulsions 

(c) Petroleum products 

(d) Oesophageal varices (already present) 

(e) Hypothermia 

(f) Foreign body ingestion like pin, nail, etc. 


2. Complications of Gastric Lavage 

(a) Aspiration pneumonia 

(b) Vomiting 

(c) Damage to gastric mucosa/oesophageal 
mucosa 

(d) Perforation, rarely. 

After the gastric lavage is complete, stomach 
may be left empty or a specific antidote may be 
left if poison is known. If poison is not known, 
activated charcoal suspension may be kept. 

Emesis 

If the patient is conscious and co-operative, emesis 
can be induced. The vomited matter should be kept 
for chemical analysis. The vomiting can be induced 
as follows: 

1. Tickling of fauces by finger or leaf. 

2. Copious amount of warm water taken by 
mouth. 

3. Gargling with soapsuds (non-detergent) 

4. Solution of common salt or mixed with 
mustard oil may be given. 

5. Syrup of ipecac can be given orally. 

6. Ammonium carbonate dissolved in water. 

7. Apomorphine given subcutaneous in cases 
where respiratory depression is not there, 
is quite effective. But it has got a lot of side 
effects. It should be best avoided. 

Emesis should not be attempted in corrosive 
poisoning or petroleum products poisoning. 
However, it must be remembered that emesis is not 
as effective as gastric lavage. 

Use of Antidotes 

Antidotes are defined as agents which counteract 
the effect of poisons. They are of various types such 
as mechanical, chemical, physiological or specific 
receptor antagonist. 

1. Mechanical Antidotes: These antidotes act 
by rendering poison useless by mechanical 
action. Common example is activated 
charcoal which acts by absorbing and 


CFMT-28 (3rd Proof).p65 


235 


8/12/07, 9:42 AM 


















236 Concise Textbook of Forensic Medicine and Toxicology 


retaining poisons within its fine pores. Fats, 
oil and egg albumin are also mechanical 
antidotes which act by forming a coating 
on mucous membrane of stomach and hence 
retard absorption. 

2. Chemical Antidotes: They act by forming 
harmless compound or insoluble solution 
when come in contact with poison. Weak 
acids are used for strong alkalies. A very 
important chemical antidote is potassium 
permanganate which is a good oxidising 
agent. It is quite useful in opium poisoning, 
phosphorus, hydrocyanic acid, morphine, 
atropine and other alkaloids. It is used as 
stomach wash. First wash should be with 
plain water so that the first wash can be 
preserved for chemical poisoning testing 
and then potassium permanganate is added. 

3. Physiological Antidotes: They act on 
tissues of the body and produce symptoms 
exactly opposite to those caused by poison 
acting on them or the enzymes. Common 
example is neostigmine used in dhatura 
poisoning to counter the effect of atropine. 

4. Specific Receptor Antagonist: It blocks the 
action of the drug or poison at its target 
receptors. Atropine and physostigmine are 
the two antagonist which act just opposite 
to each other. Other examples include BAL, 
EDTA, penicillamine and Desferal which 
are chelating agents. They act on the tissue 
cell and dislodge the metallic ions. For this 
action, they are used in metallic poisoning. 

Elimination of Poisons Absorbed into the 
System 

Intravenous fluids should be given in sufficient 
quantity so that the kidneys are able to excrete 
poisons. It should be noted that the person should 
not be overloaded with fluids. Diuresis can be 


induced by using mannitol. Forced acid diuresis 
is helpful in amphetamine poisoning while 
alkaline diuresis is helpful in aspirin and 
barbiturate poisoning. Peritoneal/hemodialysis 
can be done as it is useful in poisonings like 
barbiturates, bromides, salicylates, methyl alcohol 
and digitalis. Blood transfusion can be done and 
is very helpful in children. Purgatives can also be 
used, if needed. 

Management of General Symptoms 

The shock should be managed by introducing 
intravenous fluids. Pain should be taken care of by 
analgesic or injecting morphine if not contra¬ 
indicated. Air passages should be kept open by 
endotracheal intubations, if necessary. 

The nutritional aspect of poisoning should be 
taken care of. Adequate amount of dextrose solution 
should be given if the patient is not able to take 
himself. Feeding by gastric tube can be considered 
in cases where patient is unable to feed by himself. 

POISON INFORMATION CENTERS 

In 1994, National Poison Information Centre was 
started at the All India Institute of Medical Sciences, 
New Delhi. WHO has provided its software on 
poisons (INTOX) from where complete 
information about poison regarding its composition, 
diagnosis, clinical features and treatment is made 
available to public. Second centre was opened at 
the National Institute of Occupational Health, 
Ahmedabad. New centres have also come up at the 
Government General Hospital, Chennai, Industrial 
Toxicology Research Centre, Lucknow and Amrita 
Institute of Medical Sciences, Cochin. The 
Government of India plans to open more centres 
all over India. All these centres can be assessed by 
common public or medical community to know 
about nature and treatment of any poison. 


CFMT-28 (3rd Proof).p65 


236 


8/12/07, 9:42 AM 


















CHAPTER 

29 _ 

Corrosive Poisoning 


Corrosives are mainly acids and alkalies. Acids are 
further divided into: 

(a) Inorganic acids or mineral acids 

(b) Organic acids 

(c) Halogens. 

INORGANIC ACID POISONING 

The common inorganic acids are sulphuric acid, 
hydrochloric acid and nitric acid. 

Mechanism of Action 

These strong acids have tendency to corrode tissues. 
They cause coagulation necrosis by coming into 
contact with tissue protein by precipitation. As a 
result of which there is extensive local damage. The 
acids do not have remote effect. The walls of 
oesophagus are more resistant to acid action but 
stomach mucosa is not. Acids when taken in diluted 
form, act as irritants. When acids are diluted too 
much, they act as stimulant as in case of 
hydrochloric acid. 

Treatment 

Gastric lavage tube should not be introduced as it 
may cause perforation in the stomach wall. The 
mineral acids present in the stomach should be 
neutralised by water or milk in which calcium or 


magnesium oxide along with aluminium hydroxide 
may be added. Use of weak alkalies for 
neutralisation should not be used. The patient 
should not be given anything orally for 2-3 days 
after introduction of water or milk. The role of 
antibiotics and steroids is controversial. Total 
parenteral nutrition has also been advocated for 
stricture control but still it is controversial. 
Endoscopy is the standard practice in evaluation 
of such a patient. It is best performed within 24- 
48 hours of ingestion. Laryngoscopy must be done 
before endoscopy as sometimes supraglottic- 
epiglottic burn may be there causing oedema and 
thus causing airways obstruction. In such cases, 
endotracheal intubation should be done. If needed, 
laparotomy may be performed. If gastric necrosis 
is seen, an oesophagogastrectomy may be 
preformed. Another controversial method to prevent 
stricture formation is to insert a siliconised 
nasogastric tube in patients where endoscopy shows 
second degree burn. 

Gastric perforation and peritonitis are 
indications for immediate laparotomy. Late 
treatment includes oesophagoscopy followed by 
dilatation of stricture and surgery for oesophageal 
revision or replacement. 

Local Applications 

Local effect of mineral acids on skin should be 
treated as per treatment of burns. They should be 


CFMT-29 (3rd Proof).p65 


237 


8/12/07, 9:43 AM 



















238 Concise Textbook of Forensic Medicine and Toxicology 


washed with copious amount of flowing water. 
Later, surgical debridement may be undertaken. 
Locally, antiseptics and antibiotics should be 
applied to infections. Contractures may develop if 
the area burnt is extensive, and may require surgical 
treatment. Acids falling into eyes should also be 
treated similarly and ophthalmic damage should be 
taken care of by putting antibiotics. For pain relief, 
morphine may be given. 

Sulphuric Acid (H 2 S0 4 ) 

It is also called ‘battery acid’ or ‘oil of vitriol’. It is 
the most powerful acid. It is colourless, heavy and 
hygroscopic. It mixes with water but evolves heat 
when mixed. Its chemical formula is H 2 S0 4 . It chars 
anything which comes into contact with it. 
Commercially a stronger version pyrosulphuric 
acid is also used. Its chemical formula is H 2 S 2 0 7 
and is used in the manufacture of indigo. 

Special Symptoms 

The tissues get dehydrated when this acid comes 
into contact as this acid has great affinity for water. 
A lot of heat is produced causing acid burns, 
blackening and charring. Burning pain in mouth, 
throat and stomach may be seen. Tongue is swollen 
and is covered with white coating looking like 
parchment, which later becomes dark and then 
brown. It may become corroded and may look like 
a shapeless mass if acid is concentrated. The teeth 
become chalky white in colour as their polish is 
gone. The lips are swollen and black streaks may 
be seen on angles of mouth due to action of acid. 

Fatal Dose 

It is mostly dependent on concentration. The more 
concentrated acid is, less is the fatal dose. About 5 
ml of concentrated acid is sufficient for adults. 

Fatal Period 

The average fatal period is 18-24 hours. 


Post-mortem Appearance 

The usual appearances of corrosive poisoning are 
present. The mouth, lips and surrounding skin show 
brown or black corroded spots. There may be 
blackening of stomach mucosa along with necrosis 
or perforation may be seen. The small intestine may 
also show corrosion or blackening. Signs of 
peritonitis, strictures may be seen when death is 
delayed. Fatty changes may be seen in liver and 
kidneys. 

Medico-legal Significance 

As sulphuric acid is commercially used extensively, 
it is easily available. Accidental drinking is usually 
not possible but can occur in children. Since it is 
very strong, it cannot be used as homicidal poison 
as it affects food itself. 

Vitriolage (Acid Throwing) 

It is commonly seen when a person wants to 
disfigure the face of another person. Women are 
common victims. A person who is jilted in love 
may throw acid on the woman to teach her a lesson. 
Usually the acid is collected in a bulb and is thrown 
on the person while moving on a cycle or a 
motorcycle. Eyes may also be affected. Corneal 
destruction or even blindness can result. The acid 
thrown on face causes severe pain, corrosion of 
tissues leading to permanent scar. The treatment 
includes immediate washing with water till pain 
persists or acid is washed off. A thick paste of 
magnesium oxide or carbonate may be applied later 
on. Antibiotics should be given to prevent infection. 
The wound may be dressed later on. Sometimes, 
skin grafting is needed to replace the damaged skin. 
If eyes are involved, they should be immediately 
washed with water and then the damage should be 
taken care of by putting antibiotics. 

Accidental contact with sulphuric acid is 
possible in people working in factories and 
manufacturing establishments where acid is used. 


CFMT-29 (3rd Proof).p65 


238 


8/12/07, 9:43 AM 


















Corrosive Poisoning 239 


Nitric Acid (HN0 3 , Aqua Fortis) 

Chemical Properties 

It is a clear, colourless liquid, gives fumes when 
exposed to air. It is a very powerful oxidising agent 
and can dissolve all metals except gold and 
platinum. Commercial preparation may be of 
yellow colour due to the presence of lower oxides 
of nitrogen. 

Special Poisoning Symptoms 

Owing to property of nitric acid to convert protein 
into xanthoproteic acid, the lips, tongue and mucous 
membrane of the mouth are first softened and white 
in colour and later turn intense yellow. The teeth 
also become yellow. The skin and clothes also 
become yellow. These yellow stains can be 
confirmed by addition of ammonia water when they 
turn orange. A lot of gas is produced when nitric 
acid acts on organic tissues in stomach. The 
abdomen becomes quite distended and tender. 
Oliguria or anuria may be seen. Fumes of nitric 
acid can cause irritation in eyes leading to damage. 
Fumes may also cause dyspnoea and constriction 
in throat when inhaled. 

Fatal Dose 

About 8-10 ml. 

Fatal Period 

About 12-24 hours. 

Post-mortem Appearance 

The skin and mucous membrane are corroded and 
appear yellow. The stomach wall is soft and 
ulcerated. Perforation is less common than 
sulphuric acid. Other usual features seen in 
sulphuric acid poisoning are present. 

Medico-legal Significance 

In arts and manufacturing, nitric acid is extensively 
used. It is also used for cleaning ornaments. 
Accidental poisoning is common among workers. 
Cases of poisoning by nitric acid are quite less. 


Hydrochloric Acid (HCI) 

It is also called muriatic acid or ‘spirit of salts’. 
The chemical formula is HCI. 

Properties 

In pure form it is a colourless gaseous liquid and 
has an irritating smell. It dissolves in water easily 
to form acid of commerce or muriatic acid. It has 
yellow colour and fumes in air. 

Special Symptoms 

It is quite less damaging as compared to sulphuric 
and nitric acid. It does not stain mucous membrane. 
In large dilution, this acid is harmless and helps in 
digestion. But in strong doses it corrodes mucous 
membrane. Perforation is quite rare. Fumes when 
inhaled, cause great irritation to respiratory 
passages. 

Fatal Dose 

15-20 ml of concentrated acid. 

Fatal Period 

18-30 hours. 

Post-mortem Appearance 

The mucous membrane affected by acid is ash grey 
or black with erosions. The stomach wall is red 
due to gastritis caused by acid. Perforation is rare. 
Ulceration is very common. 

Medico-legal Significance 

Hydrochloric acid is used in industry for chlorine 
production. It is also used for dissolving metals and 
in pharmaceutical industry. Accidental and suicidal 
poisoning have been reported in people working 
in the industry. Homicidal poisoning is very rare. 

ORGANIC ACID POSONING 
Carbolic Acid 

It is also called phenyl, phenyl alcohol or phenic 
acid. The chemical formula is C 6 H 5 OH. It is 
commonly prepared from acetylene by synthesis. 


CFMT-29 (3rd Proof).p65 


239 


8/12/07, 9:43 AM 


















240 Concise Textbook of Forensic Medicine and Toxicology 


Carbolic acid is a common household poison. It is 
largely used as an antiseptic, a disinfectant and a 
preservative. It is used for cleaning floor and toilets. 
Pure carbolic acid occurs as colourless, prismatic 
crystals. It has got a characteristic odour. The crude 
carbolic acid of commerce is a dark brown liquid 
containing many impurities like cresol. Dettol, a 
commercial preparation commonly used as 
antiseptic is a chlorinated phenol with turpineol. It 
is non-toxic even when consumed in high doses. 

Poisoning by carbolic acid is called 
Carbolism. The acid in concentrated form acts 
locally as corrosive. It acts as a narcotic poison 
remotely. It causes coagulation of proteins but does 
not chemically combine with them. When applied 
to skin, it causes burning sensation, numbness and 
anaesthesia as it affects sensory neuronal endings. 
It causes white opaque eschar on skin which heals 
in 3-4 days leaving behind brown stain. 

The carbolic acid causes irritation and necrosis 
of mucous membrane leading to sloughing when 
applied in concentrated form. 

Symptoms 

When consumed in concentrated form, there is 
intense burning and thirst in mouth and throat. The 
mucous membrane of lips and mouth becomes 
white. It is rapidly absorbed in blood and it causes 
giddiness, insensibility, followed by deep coma. 
The face becomes pale or cyanosed, skin becomes 
cold and clammy, the blood pressure starts falling 
leading to shock. Initially there is respiratory 
alkalosis but soon it is followed by respiratory 
acidosis. There is an offensive smell of carbolic 
acid in breath. Convulsions may follow. Urine 
production is suppressed. When urine is passed, it 
is normal in colour, or of a greenish hue. The urine 
becomes dark or olive green when exposed to air. 
This colour change is due to further reduction of 
hydroquinone and pyrocatechol which are 
oxidation products of carbolic acid present in urine. 
This is called carboluria. Death may result due to 
respiratory failure. 


Fatal Dose 

2 gm is average fatal dose. 

Fatal Period 

3-4 hours. 

Treatment 

Ordinary emetics do not work. Gastric lavage is 
essential. A soft gastric lavage tube can be passed 
easily as there is no risk of perforation in carbolic 
acid poisoning. The mucosa of the stomach 
becomes hard and leathery due to carbolic acid. 
The stomach should be washed with water. Castor 
oil or olive oil may be left behind after gastric lavage 
is complete. Demulcents such as egg white, or milk 
can be given. Sodium sulphate may be given after 
some time. Sodium bicarbonate should be given 
intravenously to counter circulatory depression. 
Hemodialysis should be done. Supportive measures 
should be given. Local burns on skin due to carbolic 
acid should be treated with plain water first and 
later castor oil or olive oil may be applied. 

Post-mortem Appearance 

Dark brown excoriations may be seen along the 
angles of mouth. The mucous membrane of lips, 
mouth and throat is congested, ash grey or white 
in colour. The mucous membrane of oesophagus 
is also seen as white or grey. The mucous membrane 
of stomach is hard, leathery and white in colour. 
Smell of carbolic acid may be present in the gastric 
contents. The lungs are congested and oedematous. 
The kidneys may show haemorrhagic nephritis. The 
brain may be congested. 

Medico-legal Significance 

Accidental and suicidal poisoning is quite common 
as it is a household poison extensively used as 
antiseptic, disinfectant and preservative. Due to 
powerful smell, it is not used as a homicidal poison. 
Accidental poisoning is common in children. 


CFMT-29 (3rd Proof).p65 


240 


8/12/07, 9:43 AM 


















Corrosive Poisoning 241 


Acetyl Salicylic Acid (Aspirin) 

The chemical formula is C 9 H 8 0 4 . This occurs as 
white, odourless, crystalline powder having acidic 
taste. It does not dissolve in water easily. The acetyl 
salicylic acid is very extensively used as an 
analgesic, and is a component of various medicines 
used in the management of fever, skeletal pain, 
control of inflammation, arthritis, etc. 

Symptoms 

Headache, dizziness, thirst, epigastric distress, 
nausea and vomiting are common features. 
Hematemesis may also occur. Later, red and 
swollen face, weak and rapid pulse, hyperpnoea, 
profuse perspiration and dehydration may be seen. 
Mental changes commonly known as salicylate 
gags may be there followed by drowsiness and 
coma. Hypersensitivity to salicylates has been also 
reported. There may be anaphylactic reaction, 
urticaria and angio-neurotic oedema. When plasma 
salicylate levels are between 35 and 50 mg per 100 
ml of blood or above, a primary respiratory 
alkalosis is reported as stimulating effect of 
salicylates on respiratory system leads to 
hyperpnoea and loss of C0 2 results. Later, 
metabolic acidosis supervenes due to increased 
excretion of bicarbonate, potassium and sodium. 
Renal function may be disturbed. Toxic 
encephalopathy may occur. Death may occur due 
to cardiac or respiratory failure. 

Fatal Dose 

5-10 gm of aspirin is the minimum fatal dose. 
20-30 gm is an average fatal dose. Death may occur 
due to hypersensitivity reaction, even with one 
tablet. 

Fatal Period 

It may range from a few minutes to several hours. 

Treatment 

Gastric lavage should immediately be done with 
normal water, and activated charcoal should be 


given. Kidney function may be taken care of by 
giving a lot of fluid either by oral, or intravenous 
route. Metabolic acidosis should be corrected by 
giving sodium bicarbonate. Hemodialysis or 
peritoneal dialysis should be done at the earliest. 
Vital functions should be maintained by giving 
oxygen and intravenous solutions. Vitamin K 
should be administered if clotting time is prolonged. 
Forced alkaline diuresis is the key treatment to 
achieve a urinary pH of more than 7. 

Post-mortem Appearance 

The gastric mucosa may show haemorrhages and 
ulcerative lesions. In brain haemorrhage may be 
seen. Rest of the findings are non-specific. 

Medico-legal Significance 

Accidental poisoning is common when it is taken 
in large doses. Aspirin is a very commonly used 
medicine. Children may consume it accidentally. 
Suicidal poisoning is very less but reported. 
Homicidal poisoning is very rare as very large doses 
are required to kill a person. 

Acetoaminophen (Paracetamol) 

As paracetamol is much preferred over aspirin in 
management of fevers, it is widely used. Accidental 
poisoning is quite common. 

Symptoms 

Toxicity due to paracetamol can be divided into 
four stages: 

Stage I: It occurs between 12 and 24 hours 
after ingestion. Nausea, vomiting, diarrhoea and 
pallor may be seen. 

Stage II: It occurs 24-48 hour after ingestion. 
Clinically the patient appears better, but his liver 
functions are deranged. SGOT, SGPT, bilirubin and 
prothrombin time increase during this stage. 

Stage III: It occurs 48-96 hours after 
ingestion. Peak hepatotoxicity can be seen. Acute 
renal failure may occur. Myocardial damage may 
be seen. 


CFMT-29 (3rd Proof).p65 


241 


8/12/07, 9:43 AM 


















242 Concise Textbook of Forensic Medicine and Toxicology 


Stage IV: It occurs 7-8 days after ingestion. 
Recovery may be seen. 

Mechanism of Toxicity 

Paracetamol is metabolised by sulphation and 
glucuronidation. But a small fraction of 
paracetamol is converted into toxic metabolite by 
cytochrome P450 oxidase enzyme present in 
hepatic cells. In overdoses, this metabolite causes 
hepatotoxicity. 

Management 

Gastric lavage should be performed immediately. 
N-acetylcysteine should be given as early as 
possible via intravenous route or oral route. Monitor 
the liver and renal functions. Forced diuresis and 
hemodialysis are of not much use. The vitals should 
be maintained. The conservative treatment should 
be followed. 

Medico-legal Significance 

Accidental poisoning with paracetamol is common 
among children and adults. Suicidal poisoning may 
be seen but homicidal poisoning is rare. 

HALOGEN POISONING 

Chlorine, bromine and fluorine are the most 
important halogens. They combine with hydrogen 
to form acids. 

Chlorine 

It is a greenish yellow gas with a pungent smell. 
The chlorine gas is used for water purification, 
sewage treatment, in drug and cosmetic industry 
and as a bleaching agent for cotton and paper. 

Mechanism of Action 

Due to highly oxidative nature of chlorine, it causes 
rapid and extensive destruction of tissues. 

Clinical Features 

Chlorine is a highly irritant gas. When inhaled, 
it causes coughing, chest pain, dyspnoea, 


rhinorrhoea and lacrimation. It causes 
pneumonitis and severe pulmonary oedema. 
Severe metabolic acidosis is seen along with 
vomiting, vertigo and ventricular ectopic beats. 
Corrosion of teeth may be seen in chronic 
poisoning among workers. 

Fatal Dose 

Concentration above 50-100 ppm can cause death. 

Treatment 

Mild poisoning does not require much treatment. 
The person should be given oxygen for sometime. 
In severe poisoning, sodium bicarbonate can be 
given through nebuliser as it would neutralise the 
acid formation in airways. Oxygen therapy should 
be continued for long. Eyes should be treated with 
water. 

Post-mortem Features 

The characteristic features are massive pulmonary 
oedema, loss of respiratory epithelium and 
characteristic pungent smell. 

Medico-legal Significance 

Mild poisoning occurs sometimes in swimming 
pool where chlorine is used as disinfectant. 
Accidental industrial poisoning can occur in 
workers involved in industries where chlorine is 
used. 

Iodine 

The iodine emits a characteristic smell and 
constantly gives off violet coloured vapours. Iodine 
is a constituent of antiseptic preparation like tincture 
of iodine, povidone iodine and Lugol’s iodine. 
Iodine is also a part of common expectorants, anti¬ 
asthmatics, antiamoebics, anti-fungals, anti-thyroid 
drugs and contrasts used in radiological 
investigations. Iodine when locally applied, is a 
great irritant. When ingested, it causes severe 
metabolic acidosis. 


CFMT-29 (3rd Proof).p65 


242 


8/12/07, 9:43 AM 


















Corrosive Poisoning 243 


Clinical Features 

When iodine is ingested, it causes intense irritation 
in the gastrointestinal tract. Nausea, vomiting and 
diarrhoea are seen. Vomiting and stool may appear 
yellow. When locally applied, skin and mucous 
membranes appear yellow. Iodide salts are less toxic 
and usually require no treatment. But chronic 
poisoning called ‘Iodism’ can occur due to 
prolonged use of iodine salts. The common clinical 
features of iodism are metallic taste, anorexia, 
parotid swellings sometimes referred to as iodide 
mumps, lymphadenopathy, rhinorrhoea, stomatitis 
and conjunctivitis. The other clinical feature is 
ioderma consisting of erythema, urticaria and acne. 

Fatal Dose 

2-5 gm of free iodine. 

Treatment 

Same as chlorine poisoning mentioned above. 

Post-mortem Features 

The characteristic features include yellowish stains 
on skin and mucosa, and pungent smell on opening 
the body. 

Medico-legal Significance 

Accidental poisoning occurs when therapeutic 
mixtures containing iodine are taken in large doses. 
Occupational toxicity can occur in workers 
involved in industry. Radiological contrasts 
containing iodine are notorious to cause severe 
allergic reaction and sometimes deaths are seen. 

Fluorine 

It is a colourless gas which becomes fuming liquid 
when it is dissolved in water. Fluorine is used in 
etching on glass. It is an intense irritant to skin and 
mucous membrane when inhaled. The symptoms 
are similar to those of chlorine and iodine. 

Sodium fluoride and sodium silicofluoride are 
white crystalline powders. They are used as wood 


preservatives and for etching on the glass. They 
are also used as insecticides and marketed as 
cockroach powder. When fluorides are taken in, 
they precipitate calcium and inhibit many enzymes 
causing damage to kidneys and brain. Severe 
ulceration or charring may be seen on lips, tongue 
and mouth. Nausea, vomiting, diarrhoea and shock 
are seen. 

Fatal Dose 

4 gm of sodium fluoride is sufficient to kill a person. 

Fatal Period 

1-2 hours. 

Treatment 

On the same lines as mentioned for chlorine 
poisoning. 

Medico-legal Significance 

Accidental and suicidal poisoning are reported. 
Chronic poisoning is seen among workers exposed 
to fluorine. 

ALKALIES 

Mechanism of Action 

The action of alkalies is like that of acids. They 
produce corrosions when administered in 
concentrated form. They act as irritants when 
administered in diluted form. Strong alkalies can 
produce burns in oesophagus and may cause 
oesophageal stricture. With fat, alkalies form soap 
and with protein causing protonation. The common 
alkalies are as follows: 

1. Ammonia: The chemical formula is NH 3 . The 
gas of ammonia when dissolved in water forms a 
strong ammonia solution commonly also called 
‘spirits of Hartshorn’. It is a very strong alkali with 
a pungent odour. It is commonly used in 
refrigeration and fertiliser industry. 


CFMT-29 (3rd Proof).p65 


243 


8/12/07, 9:43 AM 


















244 Concise Textbook of Forensic Medicine and Toxicology 


2. Potassium Hydroxide: The chemical formula 
is KOH. It is hard, deliquescent and is available 
as pencils or cakes. It is soapy to touch, acrid in 
taste and is very soluble in water. It is a highly 
strong alkali. 

3. Sodium Hydroxide: The chemical formula is 
NaOH. It is a white, solid mass and resembles 
potassium hydroxide. It too, is highly soluble in 
water and is a very strong alkali. Mixture of 
sodium and potassium hydroxides is commonly 
referred to as ‘lye’. It is used for drain or oven 
cleaner. 

4. Ammonium Carbonate: The chemical formula 
is (NH 4 ) 2 C0 3 . It occurs as translucent, hard and 
crystalline mass. It is quite soluble in water and 
emits smell of ammonia. It is a very strong alkali. 

5. Potassium Carbonate: It is also known as 
‘pearl ash’, ‘salt of Tartar’ or ‘Javakhar’. It is a 
white, crystalline powder. It is a very strong alkali, 
used mainly for cleaning purpose. The chemical 
formula is K 2 C0 3 . 

6. Sodium Carbonate: It is also known as 
‘washing soda’, ‘Sajjikhara’, or simply as soda. 
The chemical formula is Na 2 C0 3 . It is transparent, 
monosymmetric crystal and becomes white when 
exposed to air. It is quite soluble in water. It is a 
strong alkali, commonly used for washing and 
cleaning purposes. 

Symptoms 

The alkalies produce usual symptoms as acids 
except the following: 

1. The taste of alkalies is acrid and soapy. 

2. The vomited matter is very alkaline and does 
not effervesce as in acids when comes in 
contact with earth. 


3. Purging is quite common in alkalies while 
it is rare in acids. Severe pain with bloody 
diarrhoea may be seen. 

The ammoniacal vapours are very irritating to 
respiratory systems. They produce congestion and 
watering of eyes too. Pulmonary oedema may be 
seen. 

Fatal Dose 

30 ml of ammonia is fatal. 5 gm of caustic soda is 
fatal. 

Fatal Period 

Within 24 hours, death can occur. 

Treatment 

Gastric lavage is contraindicated in strong alkalies. 
In milder cases only it can be done. Alkalies may 
be neutralised by vegetable acids like vinegar, 
lemon or orange juice. It should be followed by 
olive oil or white of egg, milk, etc. 

Rest of treatment on conservative lines, is same 
as that of acids. The oesophageal stricture should 
be handled carefully. 

Post-mortem Appearance 

Corrosions are seen in alimentary canal but not as 
extensive as seen with mineral acids. Perforation 
is rare but may be seen in ammonia. 

Medico-legal Significance 

Poisoning by alkalies is much less as compared to 
acids. Most of the poisoning is accidental or 
suicidal. Homicidal poisoning is very rare. Caustic 
soda may be locally applied to neck of ox or buffalo 
to make it unfit for agricultural purpose, so that it 
would not be able to bear yoke of a plough due to 
the local corrosive effect of caustic soda. 


CFMT-29 (3rd Proof).p65 


244 


8/12/07, 9:43 AM 


















CHAPTER 

Irritant Poisons—Vegetable 
Poisons 


The following vegetable poisons commonly cause 
poisoning. 

RICINUS COMMUNIS (CASTOR OIL PLANT, 
ARANDI) 

It belongs to the family Euphorbiaceae. There are 
two types of seeds - a large red seed with brown 
blotches yielding about 40 per cent of oil which 
is used for illumination, and a small grey seed 
having bright, polished, brown spots, yielding 
about 37 per cent of oil, commonly used for 
medicinal purpose. The seeds of castor oil plant 



contain an active principle called ricin. Ricin is a 
water soluble glycoprotein. It is a toxalbumin (Fig. 
30.1 and 30.2). 

Toxalbumin or phytotoxin is a toxic protein 
which causes agglutination of red blood cells 
leading to haemolysis and cell destruction. Its action 
resembles bacterial toxin. Toxalbumin acts as an 
antigen when injected into body and antibodies are 
produced. When the oil of the castor seed is 
extracted, the residue is very poisonous as it 
contains ricin. 

Symptoms 

The castor oil seed is not poisonous if taken as such, 
as pericarp of seeds are not dissolved by intestinal 
secretions and the seeds are passed out in toto in 
stool. It is poisonous when crushed seed is given. 
A few hours after ingestion of the seeds, the 
gastrointestinal symptoms starts. There is burning 
pain in throat, nausea, vomiting, thirst, and colicky 
pain in the abdomen. Diarrhoea with blood may be 
seen. Slowly, signs of dehydration appear as feeble 
pulse, low blood pressure, cold clammy skin and 
finally death due to shock. Oliguria may be seen. 

Fatal Dose 

Ten crushed seeds are fatal. 

Fatal Period 

It can be 1-2 days. 


CFMT-30 (3rd Proof).p65 


245 


8/12/07, 9:43 AM 

























246 Concise Textbook of Forensic Medicine and Toxicology 


Treatment 

Gastric lavage must be done immediately. 
Hypovolaemic shock should be treated with rapid 
infusion of fluids. Symptomatic treatment should 
be followed. 

Post-mortem Appearance 

Signs of irritation like congestion, softening and 
inflammation of mucosa of alimentary canal is seen. 
Ulceration may be seen. Fragments of seeds can 
be detected and should be preserved for analysis. 

Medico-legal Significance 

Oil of castor seed is commonly used as purgative 
in clinical practice. It is widely used by homeopaths 
and those practising ayurveda and unani systems 
of medicine. Poisoning by seed can be accidental 
especially in children. Suicidal poisoning is rare. 
Homicidal poisoning is reported. The powder of 
seeds can cause conjunctivitis when applied to eyes. 
Ricin is excreted into intestinal epithelium. 

CROTON TIGUUM (CROTON, JAMALGOTA) 

It belongs to the family Euphorbiaceae and is 
widely grown. The seeds are very poisonous. They 



Fig. 30.2 Croton seeds. 


contain crotin, a toxalbumin and crotonoside a 
glycoside (Fig. 30.2). 

The croton seed oil contains a very powerful 
vesicating resin composed of crotonoleic acid, 
methyl crotonic acid, crotonol and several fatty 
acids. The croton oil has disagreeable smell and 
acidic taste. When it comes in contact with skin, it 
produces redness, itching and blisters. When taken 
internally by mouth, it produces irritation of 
mucosa. 

Symptoms 

Croton oil is a strong irritant of alimentary canal. 
Immediately, there is intense pain in throat, 
abdomen, vomiting and diarrhoea which may later 
become bloody. The purging is very severe. The 
person may die because of acute dehydration 
leading to hypovolaemic shock. 

Fatal Dose 

Even one seed is sufficient to cause death. 

Fatal Period 

Death may occur in 12-24 hours. 

Treatment 

Perform gastric lavage and correct the dehydration 
with intravenous fluids. 

Post-mortem Appearance 

The mucous membranes of stomach and intestines 
would be seen as inflamed and ulcerated. The signs 
of hypovolaemic shock may be seen. Croton seed 
or residue may be seen. 

Detection of Seeds 

The croton seeds are broad, oval, measuring 1.27 
x 0.84 cm, and odourless. There is dark brown shell, 
outside of which on scrapping becomes black. The 
kernel is very oily and white in colour. The seeds 


CFMT-30 (3rd Proof).p65 


246 


8/12/07, 9:43 AM 























Irritant Poisons—Vegetable Poisons 247 


resemble castor seeds except that they are not 
bright, polished and mottled. 

Medico-legal Significance 

Croton oil is widely used as purgative by quacks, 
ayurved and unani physicians. Croton oil is also 
sometimes used by quacks as abortifacient. It can 
be administered orally for homicidal purposes. 
Accidental poisoning is reported. Suicidal 
poisoning is rare. The person may develop 
diarrhoea even if croton oil is used on skin, as 
crotonoleic acid is excreted into the intestine. 

ABRUS PRECATORIOUS (RATTI) 

It belongs to family the Leguminosae and is widely 
grown all over India. The plant is a climbing one. 
The seeds are egg-shaped, scarlet in colour with a 
black spot at one end. The seeds weigh around 105 
mg, dimensions are 0.83 x 0.62 cm. They were 
previously used by Indian goldsmiths for measuring 
gold and silver. The white variety of the seeds is 
also there. The seeds of ratti contain abrin, a 
thermolabile toxalbumin. Its actions are similar to 
ricin. The seeds of ratti also contain abrussic acid, 
urease, hemaglutinin, fat spliting enzyme and some 
poisonous proteins (Fig. 30.3). 

Since abrin is thermolabile and it is inactivated 
by hot water, the ratti seeds are harmless if they 
are boiled properly. The root and stem of ratti plant 
contains active principle of glycyrrhizin. 



Fig. 30.3 Ratti seeds. 


Symptoms 

If powdered seeds are ingested orally, they produce 
gastrointestinal symptoms like vomiting and 
diarrhoea. If extract of seeds is injected in the skin 
it produces inflammation and oedema leading to 
necrosis around the site of injection. Death may 
occur due to peripheral vascular collapse. 
Convulsions may be there. 

Ratti is widely used as animal poison. The seeds 
may be crushed and mixed with dhatura, opium and 
onion to form a paste, which is then made in the 
form of needles which are then hardened in the sun. 
These needles are then placed in a wooden handle 
(Fig. 30.4). These are inserted into the animals, 
especially around genitalia, anus or vagina. In a few 
hours, inflammation and oedema appear on the site. 
Later necrosis may occur. The animal dies within 
3^1 days due to peripheral shock. Convulsions may 
be there. The symptoms closely resemble those of a 
snake bite especially viper bite. It may appear that 
animal has been bitten by snake. 

Fatal Dose 

90-120 mg. 

Fatal Period 

3-4 days. 

1 


f 

Fig. 30.4 Suis made from ratti seeds. 




CFMT-30 (3rd Proof).p65 


247 


8/12/07, 9:43 AM 

































248 Concise Textbook of Forensic Medicine and Toxicology 


Treatment 

Local administration of anti-abrin is quite useful. 
Gastric lavage is indicated if the seeds are taken 
orally. The treatment is mainly supportive. 

Post-mortem Appearance 

Fragment of needles (commonly called suis ) can 
be found in the locally inflamed area of the animal. 
Generalised symptoms like oedema of the lungs, 
and congestion of body organs may be seen. The 
mucosa of the stomach may be congested if seeds 
are taken orally. 

Medico-legal Significance 

The seeds of ratti are commonly used for destroying 
cattle due to jealousy. The needles {suis) which are 
used for killing animals may also be used for 
homicidal purposes. In this, the person is slapped 
with the needle kept in between two fingers and 
the poison is administered by pushing the needle 
in the face. 

Accidental poisonings are reported. Suicidal 
cases are quite rare. Seed extract can be used to 
produce conjunctivitis. 

CLAVICEPS PURPUREA (ERGOT) 

Ergot is a parasitic fungus which grows on several 
plants such as rye, oats, wheat, barley and bajra. It 
is also cultivated in hilly areas. Ergot is lighter than 
air and its spores travel widely through wind. The 
ergot has a peculiar odour and a disagreeable taste. 
Ergotoxin, ergotamine and ergometrine are the 
principal alkaloids present in ergot. 

Ergometrine produces effects more rapidly but 
gangrene is not commonly seen. Prolonged use of 
ergometrine does not produce nausea, headache and 
depression. 

Ergonovine maleate is a medicinal preparation 
prepared from ergometrine and is a uterine stimulant. 


Ergot is widely used in the treatment of 
migraine, although prolonged use may produce 
gangrene of lower limbs. 

Acute Poisoning 

Initially, there is dryness and irritation of throat, 
nausea, vomiting, burning pain in stomach, 
diarrhoea, numbness, paraesthesia, disturbance of 
vision followed by weak rapid pulse, angina, 
muscular weakness, coma and death. Epistaxis, 
hematemis, haematuria may also be seen along with 
jaundice. 

Chronic Poisoning (Ergotism) 

The chronic poisoning is seen in individuals who 
keep on taking ergot preparations for medicinal 
purposes for a long time or in those who keep on 
eating grains infested with ergot fungus. 

Symptoms 

Initial symptoms are gastrointestinal. Soon, they 
are followed by either convulsive or gangrenous 
form. In convulsive form, there are neurological 
symptoms like itching, numbness, tactile 
hallucinations, paraesthesia, and pain while 
walking. Soon, convulsions start. Fixed dilated 
pupils, loss of hearing, depression may be followed 
by death due to asphyxia as a result of respiratory 
muscle failure. In the gangrenous form, it starts with 
vague pain in limbs, tingling sensation and later 
numbness of fingers and toes due to vasospasm. 
The limbs become swollen and all sensations are 
gone. There is damage to the intima of small blood 
vessels leading to gangrene, which is usually of 
dry type. Usually, the fingers and toes are affected 
but sometimes elbow or knee are also affected. 

Fatal Dose and Fatal Period 

Usually, chronic poisoning causes death over a long 
period of consumption. 


CFMT-30 (3rd Proof).p65 


248 


8/12/07, 9:43 AM 


















Irritant Poisons—Vegetable Poisons 249 


Treatment 

The source of ergot alkaloids should be stopped 
immediately. The person should be managed on 
supportive treatment. Dialysis is quite helpful in 
chronic cases. 

In acute poisoning, gastric lavage must be done 
immediately and supportive measures should be 
started. 

Medico-legal Significance 

Ergot is largely used as an abortifacient. Ergot is 
highly effective on contracting uterus. 

CAPSICUM ANNUUM (RED CHILLIES) 

Capsicum fruits are grown all over India. They are 
powdered and are used as spices in preparing 
vegetables and chutneys and pickles. It belongs to 
the family Solanaceae. The active ingredients are 
capsaicin and capsicin. The pungent nature is due 
to an alkaloid (Fig. 30.5). 

Symptoms 

In large doses capsicum acts as an irritant poison. 
It produces burning sensation in mouth and 
stomach. It causes severe acute acidity. The 
oesophagus, stomach and small intestine are 
inflamed and necrosis may be seen. Large intake 
of chilies may cause peptic ulcer. When chili 



Fig. 30.5 





powder is thrown into eyes, it causes redness, 
itching and inflammation of conjunctiva. 

Medico-legal Significance 

Chilies are also used in human torture. Chili powder 
is put in vagina, rectum, urethra, eyes and rubbed 
over breasts. The chili seeds resemble dhatura 
seeds. Hyderabad Goli is the term used by people 
who are doing torture when they put chilies in the 
rectum. 

SEMECARPUS ANACARDIUM (MARKING 
NUT TREE) 

The fruit of this tree is called ‘marking nut’. It is 
commonly used by washermen to put marks on 
clothes. The fruit is around 2-4 gm in weight, and 
has a hard, black rind within which lies thick 
pericarp. The juice of the pericarp contains 
brownish oil acrid juice which turns black when 
comes in contact with air, if mixed with lime. The 
marking nut is also known as ‘Bhilawan’. The resin 
contains semercarpol (monohydroxy phenol), 
bhilawanol (o-dihydroxy compound), fatty acids, 
tannic acids, etc. (Fig. 30.6). 

Symptoms 

When taken inside through mouth it produces 
blisters on throat and causes severe gastric irritation. 



Fig. 30.6 Marking nut. 


CFMT-30 (3rd Proof).p65 


249 


8/12/07, 9:43 AM 






















250 Concise Textbook of Forensic Medicine and Toxicology 


The stomach mucosa, and intestinal mucosa may 
be severely congested and inflamed. Ulceration 
may be seen. Dyspnoea, tachycardia, hypotension 
and finally death may occur. 

Fatal Dose 

More than 5 gm is sufficient to kill the person. 

Fatal Period 

12-14 hours. 

Medico-legal Significance 

When locally applied, it produces blisters on the 
skin followed by eczematous lesion. Accidental 
poisoning may occur. The juice is sometimes used 
as medicine for the treatment of syphilis by hakims 
and vaids. The juice may be applied in vagina 
forcibly in cases of sexual jealousy. Homicidal 
poisoning has been reported. To implicate someone, 
juice is applied on skin or mucous membrane to 
produce blisters and ulcerations. 

CALOTROPIS GIGANTEA AND C. PROCERA 
(MADAR) 

The plants belong to the family Asclepiadaceae 
and is grown all over India. Calotropis gigantea 
has purple flowers while C. procera has white 
flowers. The active peinciples are uscharin, 
calatoxin and calatropin. When cut, stem and 
leaves of the plant exude an acrid milky juice. This 
juice is bitter in taste and acidic in reaction. When 
this juice is allowed to stand or heated, serum is 
exuded leaving behind white clot. The serum 
contains an active principle named gigantin which 
is very toxic. 

Symptoms 

When taken through mouth, madar juice produces 
burning pain in the throat and stomach. Salivation, 


stomatitis, vomiting, diarrhoea, convulsions and 
finally death may be seen. When applied externally, 
it may produce local irritation and inflammation 
on the skin. If put in eyes, it may cause irritation 
and conjunctivitis. 

Fatal Dose 

Not known. 

Fatal Period 

Death may occur within 12-18 hours. 

Treatment 

Gastric lavage should be done immediately and 
later conservative treatment should be followed. 

Medico-legal Significance 

The madar plants are used as medicines adjunct. 
The flowers, leaves, root bark and milky juice are 
used. The flowers are used in stomach ailments as 
a tonic. The leaves are used as poultice over 
abdomen in colic. The root bark is used as an 
emetic. The milky juice is used as a vesicant, a 
depilatory and remedy in chronic skin diseases. 
Madar juice is used by tanners for removing hair 
from skin. It is also used for criminal abortion. It 
may be administered orally or used in abortion 
stick. Madar juice is sometimes used for killing 
infants. It is also used as a cattle poison and is thrust 
into the rectum of an animal by stick or cloth. The 
root of C. procera is used by snake charmers to 
control newly caught snakes as they cannot stand 
its smell. In Africa, both the plants are used in 
preparation of arrows and darts. 

PLUMBAGO ROSEA (LAL CHITRA) AND 
P. ZEYLANICA (CHITRA) 

The roots of these plants contain an active 
principle called ‘plumbagin’, a glycoside. It is a 
powerful irritant and has germicidal action. In 
small doses it acts as a sudorific and stimulates 
the contraction of muscles of heart, intestine and 


CFMT-30 (3rd Proof).p65 


250 


8/12/07, 9:43 AM 


















Irritant Poisons—Vegetable Poisons 251 


uterus. In large doses, it causes respiratory failure 
leading to death. 

Symptoms 

When the roots are taken internally through mouth, 
it causes irritation of mucosa of stomach and 
intestine and later causes death due to narcotic 
action. Initially, there may be vomiting, burning 
pain in the stomach and diarrhoea. When applied 
externally, it causes irritation and blister formation. 

Medico-legal Significance 

The crushed roots are used for procuring criminal 
abortion. The paste of these roots are applied on 
abortion sticks. Juice of the roots can be applied locally 
to simulate bruise. Homicide is rare with these plants. 

COLOCYNTH (BITTER APPLE! INDRA YANI) 

It is the dried pulp of fruit of Citrullus colocynthis 
which is widely grown. The root and fruit contain 
a glycoside named colocynthin. It is bitter in taste 


and acidic. This is a very strong purgative when 
taken in large doses. 

Symptoms 

The symptons are severe abdominal pain, vomiting, 
severe diarrhoea and bloody stools leading to shock 
and death. 

Fatal Dose 

The fatal dose is about 1-3 gm. 

Fatal Period 

Death may occur in 24 hours. 

Treatment 

Gastric lavage followed by conservative supportive 
treatment. 

Medico-legal Significance 

It may be used for procuring criminal abortion or 
may be taken for suicidal purposes. 


CFMT-30 (3rd Proof).p65 


251 


8/12/07, 9:43 AM 


















CHAPTER 

Irritant Poisons—Non-metallic 
Poisons (Inorganic) 


MECHANISM OF ACTION 

Irritant poisons act by causing inflammation in 
gastrointestinal tract. Symptoms usually start in 30 
minutes to 1 hour after ingestion. There may be 
nausea, vomiting, burning pain and feeling of 
constriction in throat. There may be blood stained 
vomiting. Diarrhoea may follow. There may be pain 
and tenderness in abdomen. Slowly, the features 
of shock develop. Pulse may be weak and trendy. 
The blood pressure starts falling. Death may occur. 
Sometimes, features of irritant poison resemble 
diseases such as gastroenteritis, cholera, peritonitis 
or colic. 

INORGANIC POISONING 

It may be due to: 

1. Non-metallic poisons 

2. Metallic poisons 

In this chapter non-metallic poisons are discussed. 

PHOSPHORUS POISONING 

Phosphorus occurs in two forms, namely yellow 
or white, and red. The yellow phosphorus is highly 
toxic. It is waxy, translucent and white. When 
exposed to air, it becomes yellow. It is not soluble 
in water. So, for preservation purposes, it is kept 
under water. When exposed to air, it emits fumes 


of phosphorus trioxide as a result of oxidation. They 
have garlic-like odour. They are luminous in dark. 
The yellow phosphorus catches fire if temperature 
crosses 30°C. The yellow phosphorus was initially 
used in heads of Lucifer match box, but since 1931 
its use in match box, industry was banned and red 
phosphorus is used nowadays. The yellow 
phosphorus is extensively used in chemical 
industry, fertiliser and rodenticide industry. It is also 
used in fireworks, gunpowder and incendiary 
ammunition. 

Red phosphorus is prepared by heating yellow 
phosphorus at a temperature of 240°C in 
atmosphere of nitrogen or carbon dioxide. It has 
no taste or odour. It is stable at room temperature 
and is not oxidised as yellow phosphorus does. It 
is not poisonous. It is used in match box industry. 
It is not present on heads of match sticks but on 
sides of match box along with powdered glass. The 
heads of safety match sticks contain potassium 
chlorate and antimony sulphide. 

Symptoms of Yellow Phosphorus Poisoning 

The symptoms start appearing after a latent period 
of 1-6 hours after ingestion of yellow phosphorus. 
The symptoms starts with gastrointestinal system. 
There is a garlic-like taste in mouth, burning pain 
in throat and abdomen. There is intense thirst 
followed by vomiting. The vomited matter is 
garlicky in taste and is luminous in dark. The breath 
is also garlicky and may be luminous in dark. 
Diarrhoea may be present. In some cases, the 


CFMT-31 (3rd Proof).p65 


252 


8/12/07, 9:43 AM 



















Irritant Poisons — Non-metallic Poisons (Inorganic) 253 


person may collapse because of circulatory failure 
when he has consumed a heavy dose. Acute yellow 
atrophy of liver is seen. The person may die due to 
shock, or later due to passage into coma. 

In most of the cases, however, the person 
improves as symptoms subside. It may appear as 
thought recovery has begun. But this is a latent 
period before liver complications begin. 

Liver failure: Jaundice appears. Symptoms 
resemble acute viral hepatitis. Pruritus develops. 
The pain in stomach increases. Liver and spleen 
are enlarged and tender. Diarrhoea and vomiting 
become prominent. Haemorrhages may occur in 
mucous membranes like urethra, vagina and nose. 
Purpuric spots develop. The signs of hepatic failure 
appear. 

The nervous system also starts getting affected. 
Restlessness, insomnia, impaired vision, and finally 
paralysis may be there. Circulatory collapse may 
be there. Pulse becomes rapid and irregular. 
Hypotension develops. The person may die of 
circulatory or nervous failure. 

Mechanism of Action 

Phosphorus is a protoplasmic poison. It disturbs 
cellular metabolism. Cellular oxidation is greatly 
affected and excessive fatty degeneration is seen. 
When comes in contact with skin, yellow 
phosphorus causes burns. 

Fatal Dose 

30-120 mg is the average fatal dose. 

Fatal Period 

4-10 hours if collapse occurs due to heavy doses 
otherwise it is about 2-7 days. Sometimes, 2-3 
weeks may also occur before death. 

Treatment 

Gastric lavage should be done immediately with 
solution of potassium permanganate. It acts as an 
antidote by oxidising phosphorus present in the 
stomach to harmless compounds like phosphoric 


acid and phosphates. Instead of potassium 
permanganate, solution of hydrogen peroxide may 
also be used. Charcoal may be administered later 
on. 

The stomach can also be washed with warm 
water or 0.1 per cent solution of copper sulphate. 
It acts as a chemical antidote as it combines with 
phosphorus to form harmless copper phosphide. 
The patient should be given intravenous fluids and 
circulatory system should be managed with drugs. 
Morphine may be given to relieve pain. 
Dehydration should be taken care of with large 
amount of fluids. To restrict liver damage, low fat, 
high protein and high carbohydrate diet should be 
given. 

Post-mortem Findings 

On opening the body cavities, a garlic-like smell 
may be appreciated. The mucous membrane of 
stomach and intestine may be found congested, 
inflamed and perforations may be seen. The 
stomach contents may be garlicky in smell and 
luminous in the dark. Signs of liver failure may be 
seen. The skin may appear yellow. Haemorrhagic 
spots may be seen all over the body. The liver 
presents the features of necrobiosis. It may be 
enlarged. The liver appears yellow, and fatty 
degeneration may be seen. In acute yellow 
phosphorus poisoning liver atrophy, liver is smaller 
in size, greasy, leathery in character and yellow in 
appearance. The necrosis of liver cells is seen. The 
fatty degeneration may be seen in heart and kidneys. 

Chronic Phosphorus Poisoning 

It is rare nowadays. It occurs in workers who are 
exposed to fumes of yellow phosphorous. There is 
necrosis and sequestration of bones as a result of 
increased bone formation in the Haversian and 
marrow canals of bone, which is due to disturbance 
in the circulation of blood in bone. Even below the 
epiphyseal cartilage, bone formation is seen. The 
characteristic findings of chronic phosphorus 
poisoning are pain in teeth, failure of dental socket 


CFMT-31 (3rd Proof).p65 


253 


8/12/07, 9:43 AM 


















254 Concise Textbook of Forensic Medicine and Toxicology 


to heal, and swelling and necrosis of jaw. Usually, 
lower jaw in affected. This is also known as Phossy 
jaw. The mucous membrane of mouth is congested. 
Besides these, pain in abdomen, nausea, vomiting, 
diarrhoea, jaundice and anaemia may be seen. 
Death may occur from debility. 

Treatment 

The person should be immediately removed from 
the source of fumes of yellow phosphorus. The teeth 
should be taken care of by removing causes and 
making supportive measures. 

Medico-legal Significance 

The phosphorus poisoning is rare now. People 
working in the industry may get affected 
accidentally. Some cases of suicidal and homicidal 
poisoning have been reported. 

ORGANOPHOSPHORUS AND 
CARBAMATES POISONING 

Organophosphorus compounds and carbamates are 
extensively used all over India as insecticides and 
miticide in agriculture. They are quite effective, 
cheap and easily available. Their quick action and 
easy availability are the factors that they are 
extensively used as suicidal poisons. Accidental 
poisoning is also very common in agricultural 
workers due to exposure. 

The organophosphorus compounds are mainly 
of two types—alkyl phosphates and aryl 
phosphates. The common alkyl phosphates are 
HETP, TEPP, OMPA, Malathion, Systox, and 
Dipterex. The common aryl phosphates are 
parathion, Tik 20, chlorothion, etc. 

The common preparations of carbamates are 
Baygon, Kevin 50, carbaryl, carbendazim, 
carbofuran, etc. 

Mechanism of Action 

They are absorbed from skin, respiratory, 
gastrointestinal and circulatory systems very easily. 


Acetylcholine is a neurotransmitter that affects 
preganglionic and postganglionic parasympathetic, 
synapses (muscarinic actions), sympathetic 
preganglionic synapses including the adrenal 
medulla (nicotinic actions) and the neuromuscular 
junctions (nicotinic actions). At the synapses it is 
hydrolysed by the enzyme acetylcholinesterase. 
The toxic effects of organophosphorus compounds 
and carbamates are due to inhibition of activity of 
acetylcholinesterase. As a result, there is 
accumulation of acetyl choline at the synapse. This 
initially stimulates and later paralyses the 
cholinergic transmission in CNS, autonomic 
ganglia, parasympathetic nerve endings, 
sympathetic nerve endings at sweat glands and 
neuromuscular junction. 

Symptoms 

Carbamates cause less morbidity and mortality as 
they cause transient inhibition of cholinesterase as 
compared to organophosphorus compounds. Toxic 
effects of carbamates on central nervous system are 
not much prominent as they do not penetrate the 
central nervous system as effectively as 
organophosphorus compounds. The accumulated 
acetylcholine causes following symptoms: 

1. Muscarinic Features (Parasympathetic 
Features): Anorexia, nausea, vomiting, 
abdominal cramps, colic, sweating, 
salivation, bronchial spasm, increased 
bronchial secretion, pupillary constriction, 
defective vision and cyanosis. Hypotension 
and bradycardia may be seen. 

2. Nicotonic Features (Somatic Motor and 
Sympathetic Nerve Endings): Muscle 
fasciculations, muscle cramps, fatigue, loss 
of deep tendon reflexes, paralysis, 
tachycardia, hypertension and rarely 
mydriasis. 

3. CNS Features: Severe headache, tremors, 
restlessness, ataxia, weakness, confusion, 
slurred speech, coma, convulsions and 
depression of cardiorespiratory centre. 
Other features of poisoning are: 


CFMT-31 (3rd Proof).p65 


254 


8/12/07, 9:43 AM 


















Irritant Poisons — Non-metallic Poisons (Inorganic) 255 


1. An acute garlic odour may be seen but it is 
also seen in arsenic and phosphorus 
poisoning. 

2. ECGfeatures: ST-T changes are seen. A low 
voltage of QRS is seen. 

3. Uncommon manifestations: Hyperglycaemia 
may be seen in 7-10 per cent cases, hyper 
amylasaemia and clinical acute pancreatitis 
may be seen. Hypoglycaemia may also be 
seen. Changes in ECG include AV 
dislocations, idioventricular rhythms, 
ventricular extrasystole, increased PR, QRS 
and QT interval. 

4. Weakness of upper extremities and neck 
musculature may be seen. Cranial nerve 
palsy may be seen. 

5. Delayed neuropathy may be seen after 
10-21 days. It is mainly seen in 
organophosphorus poisoning. It starts 
distally and progresses proximally. 
Paraesthesia and motor weakness may be 
seen. 

6. The sequelae of organophosphorus 
poisoning include myonecrosis, delayed 
neuropathy, personality changes, 
depression, confusion and thought 
disorder. 

7. If there is exposure to organophosphorus 
compounds within first trimester of 
pregnancy, congenital malformations may 
be seen. If ingested later in pregnancy, it 
may cause spontaneous labour. 

Confirmation Test (Laboratory Methods) 

If erythrocyte cholinesterase levels are reduced 
below 50 per cent and symptoms are present, the 
diagnosis is confirmed. Plasma pseudocholinesterase 
levels can also be assessed and would be found to 
be reduced. These enzyme levels may also be 
reduced in chronic liver disease, malnutrition, 
infections and anaemias. In carbamate poisoning, 
the measurement of these tests is unreliable as 
enzyme activity returns to normal within a few hours. 


Fatal Dose 

The organophosphates can be classified according 
to toxicity: 

1. Mild Toxic: Chlorothion and malathion are 
mild toxics as fatal dose is more than 25 gm. 

2. Moderately Toxic: Diazinon has a fatal 
dose of 10-25 gm. 

3. Highly Toxic: The fatal dose is less than 5 
gm. Examples are parathion (15-30 mg), 
methyl parathion (15 mg) and TEPP (5 gm). 

Fatal Period 

Symptoms start within 30 minutes and death may 
occur within 4 hours. In non-fatal cases, effects may 
last for 30-72 hours. 

Treatment 

The person should be removed from the source of 
exposure. All his clothes have to be taken off and 
exposed areas should be cleaned with water or soap 
to remove all unabsorbed poison present on the 
skin. The airways should be immediately secured, 
breathing and circulation to be maintained. Gastric 
lavage should be started immediately with 2 per 
cent solution of potassium permanganate. Sodium 
sulphate may also be given. 

Antidotes 

Atropine blocks muscarinic and CNS manifestation 
of the poison but has no effect on nicotinic effects. 
Initially, atropine is administered in a dose of 2^4- 
mg for adults and 0.05 mg/kg for children. The 
same dose should be repeated every 5-15 minutes 
till signs of atropinisation appear in form of dry 
skin, diluted pupils and tachycardia. The atropine 
should be continued till oral and tracheal secretions 
stop. Do not consider the dilatation of pupils as the 
end point. It is reached when he cannot spit. After 
the end point is reached, administer atropine in 
small doses at less frequent intervals to maintain 
atropinisation for 24-48 hours. If excess dose of 
atropine is given, it may produce delirium and fever. 


CFMT-31 (3rd Proof).p65 


255 


8/12/07, 9:43 AM 


















256 Concise Textbook of Forensic Medicine and Toxicology 


Specific Reactivator Oximes 

PAM or pralidoxime can be used as it is a 
cholinesterase reactivator which primarily counters 
the nicotinic effects of organophosphates, though 
it can also reverse some of the CNS effects. Since 
it generates acetylcholine at all levels, it can be 
effectively used. It is very effective if it is used early. 
In adults, PAM can be administered in a dose of 1- 
2 gm slow intravenously over 10-20 minutes while 
in children the dose is 25-40 mg/kg. The dose is 
repeated 4-8 hours. PAM is contraindicated in 
carbaryl (carbamate) poisoning. In other 
carbamates, the role of PAM is not clear. Since the 
duration of action of carbamates is short, PAM is 
not required. Renal function should be adequate 
when PAM is given. 

Besides above, electrolyte balance, hydration 
and nutrition should be taken care of. Ventricular 
arrhythmias should be managed. The most common 
cause of death is respiratory failure. 

Post-mortem Appearance 

The findings suggest asphyxial death. The face is 
found to be congested and blood-stained froth may 
be seen. The stomach wall is found to be congested. 
The stomach contents have a smell of kerosene. 
The lungs are found to be congested and 
oedematous. The pulmonary oedema is seen. Brain 
is congested and petechial haemorrhages may be 
seen in brain, heart and stomach. 

Medico-legal Importance 

The organo-phosphates and carbamates are 
extensively used by farmers to commit suicide as 
they are easily available and very effective. In India, 
in many states like Andhra Pradesh and Punjab 
many farmers committed suicide by these poisons 
due to inability to pay loans. 

Accidental poisoning is very common in 
agricultural workers who spray them in fields. 
Protective clothings like white overall, rubber 
gloves, rubber boots, eye shields, dust masks, 
respirators, etc., should be used by these workers. 


The spraying should not be done for more than 10 
hours. The person should change clothes and take 
bath after the spraying is over. 

Accidental poisoning among children is 
common when they put poison in their mouth 
accidentally while playing in fields sprayed by 
organophosphates. 

Homicidal poisoning is very rare as very bitter 
taste of these compounds make them unfit as 
homicidal poisons. Kerosene-like smell cannot be 
masked even when mixed with food although small 
children can be given poison forcibly by mouth to 
kill them. 

Aluminium Phosphide Poisoning 

Aluminium phosphide poisoning has increased like 
jungle fire since the last decade. Aluminium 
phosphide is used as grain preservative all over 
India. In the market it is available in 3 gm pellet 
containing 57 per cent aluminium phosphide, rest 
being ammonium carbonate. The common names 
of commercial preparations are Celphos, Alphos, 
Quickphos, Synfume and Phosfume. The usual 
procedure of storage is that after grains are 
deposited in godowns, pellets of aluminium 
phosphide are kept in between and godowns are 
sealed. Phosphine gas is liberated which kills any 
pests or rodents which manage to sneak into 
godowns and thus get killed. Once the grains are 
needed for consumption, godowns are opened and 
the grain is exposed to sunlight, the phosphine gas 
present in the grain is liberated into atmosphere 
and the grain is suitable for human consumption. 
The non-toxic residues like phosphite and 
hypophosphite of aluminium are left in the grain 
which can easily be removed. 

Mechanism of Toxicity 

Once the pellets of aluminium phosphide enter the 
stomach due to ingestion, phosphine is liberated 
due to action of water on pellet there. This 
phosphine gas is absorbed and produces the 
deleterious effect. A part of aluminium phosphide 


CFMT-31 (3rd Proof).p65 


256 


8/12/07, 9:43 AM 


















Irritant Poisons — Non-metallic Poisons (Inorganic) 257 


is also absorbed directly and is metabolised in liver 
with a slow release of phosphine. It causes 
prolonging of symptoms. Phosphine thus liberated 
binds to cytochrome oxidase and causes widespread 
organ damage. Focal myocardial necrosis is caused 
leading to cardiotoxicity. 

Symptoms 

The symptoms of aluminium phosphide poisoning 
can occur either due to ingestion of pellet or 
inhalation of phosphine gas. In both circumstances, 
symptoms are the same. If a pellet of aluminium 
phosphide is exposed to environment for a long 
time, it becomes useless as, due to environmental 
moisture phosphine is liberated into the atmosphere. 
The poisoning symptoms can be classified as mild 
and moderate to severe. 

Mild Poisoning 

Irritation of gastrointestinal tract and respiratory 
distress are the main features. Dizziness, fatigue, 
nausea, vomiting, diarrhoea, headache and tightness 
in chest are commonly seen. 

Moderate Poisoning 

Besides above, diplopia, ataxia, tremors and 
paraesthesiae are seen. 

Severe Poisoning 

Adult respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS), 
cardiac arrhythmias, convulsions, coma and death 
are seen. 

Hypotension, shock, tachycardia and 
sometimes bradycardia may be seen. Congestive 
heart failure occurs due to myocardial depression. 
Atrial fibrillation, premature beats, A-V junctional 
tachycardia, and conduction defects are seen in 
ECG recording along with occasional ST segment 
elevation. Acute pericarditis has also been reported. 

Within 6-36 hours, respiratory symptoms like 
dyspnoea, cough, cyanosis and ARDS are seen. 

Consciousness is retained till the end in most 
of the cases. Metabolic acidosis is seen. 


Fatal Dose 

One pellet of aluminium phosphide is sufficient to 
kill an adult person. Even less than 500 mg of 
unexposed pellet is a lethal dose. Inhalation of 
phosphine at a level of 400-600 ppm is lethal. 

Fatal Period 

It ranges from 30 minutes to few hours. Sometimes, 
death may be delayed for a few days if the person 
is hospitalised. 

Treatment 

There is no antidote available for poisoning due to 
aluminium phosphide or phosphine gas. The whole 
treatment is conservative. A gastric lavage with 
potassium permanganate should be done. The 
lavage oxidises the liberated phosphine into a non¬ 
toxic phosphate. Activated charcoal may be given 
as it adsorbs phosphine gas. 

The magnesium sulphate infusion is very 
helpful in reducing the toxicity to various organs. 
It reduces cardiac arrhythmias. The dose is 3 gm 
bolus followed by 6 gm infusion over 12 hours for 
5-7 days. 

Since phosphine is excreted through lungs and 
kidneys, renal function should be maintained by 
giving intravenous fluids. The patient should be 
maintained on supportive treatment. Mortality is 
very high as aluminium phosphide is very toxic. 

Laboratory Test 

Silver nitrate test can be done to confirm the 
presence of aluminium phosphide in vomitus, 
lavage fluid or in the breath. 

Procedure 

Take 1 ml of vomitus or lavage fluid in a test tube 
and dilute it by adding 15 ml of water. Take two 
round strips of filter paper impregnated with silver 
nitrate. Place one on the mouth of the test tube and 
the other on open surface. Slowly heat the test tube 
to 50°C for 15-20 minutes. If aluminium 


CFMT-31 (3rd Proof).p65 


257 


8/12/07, 9:43 AM 


















258 Concise Textbook of Forensic Medicine and Toxicology 


phosphide is present in the fluid, phosphine would 
be liberated and it will darken the filter paper by 
producing silver. The other strip is kept in open as 
a control. 

If you want to test the presence of phosphine 
in breath, keep the filter paper impregnated with 
silver nitrate as a mask. Ask the patient to breathe 
for 15-20 minutes. If phosphine is present, the 
filter paper would turn dark due to production of 
silver. 

Post-mortem Appearance 

There are no specific findings present. Congestion 
and haemorrhages may be seen in gastric mucosa 
and intestinal mucosa. 

Medico-legal Significance 

Aluminium phosphide poisoning is increasing as 
farmers all over India are using it as a preservative. 
The aluminium phosphide pellets are easily 
available and are quite cheap. 

Suicidal poisoning is very common in rural 
India by aluminium phosphide. Since it is kept in 
homes, wives or children may also use it for suicidal 
purposes. 

Accidental poisoning is also common as a 
farmer may sleep near godown and may die of the 
leaking phosphine from godown where it has been 
kept as a preservative. 


Accidental poisoning is also reported in 
children who may eat it by mistake. 

Homicidal poisoning in adults is not reported 
but small children may be killed by forcible 
ingestion of pellets or giving them in food. 

PYRETHRINS AND PYRETHROIDS 

Pyrethrins are derived from plant chrysanthemum. 
Pyrethroids are synthetic compounds which are 
commonly used as “knockout” for mosquitoes and 
other insects. The common pyrethrins and 
pyrethroids are allethrin used in Baygon mats, 
D-allethrin (used in Goodnight mats, Hit insect 
repellent and pyrethrum (Tortoise mosquito coil). 
These compounds are used as insect repellent, in 
pest control. 

Since these compounds can easily be 
metabolised by human beings, they are not toxic 
but can produce allergic and other reactions when 
taken in large doses. The common symptoms are 
dermatitis, itching, eye irritation and rhinorrhoea 
and nasal irritation. In large doses they can produce 
nausea, vomiting, paraesthesias, seizures, 
fasciculations and coma. Treatment includes skin 
decontamination by washing with soap. Eyes 
should be cleaned with water. In massive ingestion, 
gastric lavage is useful. The rest of the treatment is 
symptomatic. 


CFMT-31 (3rd Proof).p65 


258 


8/12/07, 9:43 AM 


















CHAPTER 

up 

Irritant Poisons—Metallic 
Poisons (Inorganic) 


ARSENIC 

Arsenic in nature, is found in metal form, inorganic 
compound and organic compound. 

Metallic Arsenic 

Arsenic in metal form is not poisonous as it is 
insoluble in water and hence cannot be digested 
by alimentary canal. But when metal arsenic is 
exposed to air, it becomes toxic. When heated, 
arsenic readily combines with oxygen in the air and 
forms poisonous arsenic trioxide. On local 
application, arsenic may enter the skin after 
oxidation in the air and may cause local necrosis. 

Inorganic Compounds of Arsenic 

The following inorganic compounds are commonly 
seen: 

1. Arsenic Trioxide: The chemical formula is 
As 2 0 3 . It is commonly known as Sankhya 
or Somalkhar. It is white, crystalline powder, 
odourless and tasteless. It is almost insoluble 
in water and comes up as a thin layer above 
water when mixed. In nature it is found as 
an impurity in iron and sulphide ores. 
Arsenic trioxide or arsenious oxide is 
extensively used in dyeing, preparation of 
wall papers and artificial flowers, calico 
printing and arts. It is the main constituent 


of fly papers and many powders used for 
killing rats. It is also used for preserving 
timber and skins against white ants. It is also 
widely used as medicinal preparation liquor 
arsenicalis (Fowler’s solution) containing 
one per cent arsenious oxide. It is also used 
by hakims and vaids in treatment of various 
diseases like skin disorders, rheumatism, 
impotence and fevers. 

2. Arsenites: When arsenic trioxide combines 
with alkalies and their carbonate or other 
metals, arsenites are formed. The alkaline 
arsenites are soluble in water. They are more 
toxic than arsenates. 

Potassium arsenite, sodium arsenites: 
They both are very toxic. They are used 
in manufacture of flypapers, weed 
killers, rodenticide, fungicides and 
sheep-dips. Copper arsenite (Scheele’s 
green) and copper acetoarsenite (Paris 
green) were extensively used for 
colouring artificial flowers, wall papers, 
toys, dress article and sweetmeats. But 
they have been replaced by aniline 
dyes. They are sometimes used as 
rodenticide. 

3. Arsenates: When arsenic acid combines 
with metal, arsenates are formed. The 
arsenates of alkaline metals are soluble in 
water. Rest are not. The chief arsenates are 
sodium arsenates and potassium arsenates. 


CFMT-32 (3rd Proof).p65 


259 


8/12/07, 9:44 AM 



















260 Concise Textbook of Forensic Medicine and Toxicology 


Both of these salts are toxic and are used 
for homicidal purpose and for killing cattle. 

4. Arseniuretted Hydrogen: It is formed by 
action of nascent hydrogen on a soluble 
arsenic compound. It is liberated in 
industries involving galvanising, soldering, 
etching or lead plating. It is very poisonous 
and has a garlicky odour. It burns with bluish 
white flame. It is a haemolytic poison. 

Organic Compounds of Arsenic 

These compounds are formed when arsenic 
combines with big organic groups. Most of the 
compounds were used in medicine but now they 
are not used. Common are cacodylic acid, sodium 
cacodylate, atoxyl, salvarsan, neosalvarsan and 
sulpharsenobenzene. They are less toxic as 
compared to inorganic salts. 

Acute Poisoning 

The symptoms of acute poisoning occur within 30 
minutes of the exposure. First, there is usually a 
metallic taste in the mouth and a slight smell of 
garlic in breath. Dry mouth and dysphagia are seen. 
Severe nausea, vomiting, colicky abdominal pain 
and profuse diarrhoea with rice water stools start 
abruptly. Bloody diarrhoea may also be seen. All 
arsenic compounds inhibit sulphydryl enzyme 
system which are necessary for cellular oxidation. 


Arsenic is a very potent capillary poison. It dilates 
capillaries and causes damage. This leads to 
generalised vasodilatation and transudation of 
plasma and causes shock. Intense thirst and severe 
vomiting may be seen. The urine is suppressed. 
Slowly the person goes into shock. The eyes are 
sunken. The pulse is feeble and irregular. The death 
occurs due to hypovolaemic shock. 

If a very large dose is taken, death may occur 
rapidly from shock without producing any 
symptoms. Sometimes, when a large dose is taken, 
it may induce vomiting and it may be possible that 
all poison is vomited out even before absorption. 
So, the person’s life may be saved (Table 32.1). 

A sensorimotor peripheral neuropathy may 
develop within few hours of congestion but it is 
usually seen 2-8 weeks after ingestion. In severe 
cases, the patient may have quadriplegia and may 
die due to respiratory failure as a result of 
involvement of muscles. Cardiac manifestations 
include acute cardiomyopathy, subendocardial 
haemorrhages and ECG changes. Prolonged QT 
interval and nonspecific ST-T changes may be seen. 
Hyperpyrexia and haemolysis may also be seen. 

Sub-acute Poisoning 

When a small quantity of arsenic is administered 
slowly at a repeated intervals to cause death, it is 
called a sub-acute poisoning. In this case, death is 


Table 32.1 Differences between arsenic poisoning and cholera 


Symptoms 

Arsenic poisoning 

Cholera 

1. Pain in throat 

May be there before vomiting starts 

Not there 

2. Voice 

No change 

Peculiar, rough and whistling 

3. Conjunctiva inflammation 

May be seen 

Not there 

4. Vomiting matter 

Contains mucus, bile and blood may 
be there 

Watery 

5. Purging 

Follows vomiting 

Precedes vomiting 

6. Motions 

Rice water in appearance but may 
be blood stained 

“Rice water" in appearance, 
liquid, white discharge 

7. Laboratory examination 

Barium-like radiopaque shadow may 
seen on X-rays 

Arsenic detected on chemical analysis, 
urinary coproporphyrin may be positive 

Cholera vibrio may be 
seen and cultured 


CFMT-32 (3rd Proof).p65 


260 


8/12/07, 9:44 AM 





















Irritant Poisons—Metallic Poisons (Inorganic) 261 


caused slowly and may appear as natural death due 
to illness. The symptoms are dyspepsia, cough and 
tingling in the throat at first, then vomiting, purging 
with abdominal pain and tenesmus occurs. The 
motions become bloody. The symptoms of neuritis 
are more marked. The patient complains of severe 
pain in muscles which are quite tender. The death 
occurs due to failure of respiratory muscles. In non- 
fatal cases, paralysis may be seen. 

Acute Poisoning by Arseniuretted Hydrogen 

This gas when absorbed through lungs, 
immediately acts as direct poison to haemoglobin 
of red blood cells. It causes haemolysis leading to 
jaundice. Faintness, giddiness, intense headache, 
nausea, vomiting, abdomen pain, anuria and uremia 
may be seen. Soon, dyspnoea, cyanosis and 
collapse may set in. Death may occur due to coma 
or respiratory failure. 

After 2-4 weeks of acute ingestion of arsenic, 
hair loss may be seen along with Mees’s lines on 
the nails. They are white transverse bands seen in 
the nailplate. These lines may remain up to one 
year. 

Fatal dose: About 180 mg of arsenic trioxide 
is a fatal dose. The fatal dose of arseniuretted 
hydrogen in exposure limit of 30 minutes-1 hour 
in concentration of 1 part gas in 20,000 parts of 
air. Fatal period: The average fatal period is 12- 
48 hours. 

Diagnosis: Acute arsenic poisoning may be 
confused with cholera where same features may 
be seen. Table 32.1 shows how to differentiate the 
two. 

Treatment: Gastric lavage must be started at 
once. It should be done with plain water first, then 
freshly prepared hydrated ferric oxide may be given 
in oral doses so as to convert arsenic trioxide into 
harmless ferric arsenite. If it is not available, 
activated charcoal may be given. Adequate 
intravenous solutions should be given to manage 
shock. An exchange transfusion may be of help in 
clearing arsenic from blood in early stages. 
Hemodialysis, if available, can be done. Chelation 


therapy is very useful. Dimercaprol (BAL) should 
be administered in a dose of 3-5 mg/kg 
intramuscularly every 4 hours. This dose should 
be tapered off but administration of BAL should 
be continued till the urinary excretion is less than 
50 Ugm every 24 hours. Penicillamine has also been 
found to be useful in some cases. Recently 2,3- 
dimercaptosuccinic acid is used which can be given 
orally and is quite useful. 

In the treatment of arseniuretted hydrogen, the 
person should be treated with fresh air and oxygen 
inhalation. Early exchange transfusion or 
hemodialysis can be done. BAL is not much 
effective in the treatment. 

Post-mortem Findings 

The characteristic finding is that the rigor mortis 
lasts longer than usual. Due to dehydration, the 
body may show features like sunken eyeballs and 
it may appear to be shrunken. In internal 
appearances, stomach mucosa may show gross 
congestion and is found covered with particles of 
arsenic embedded into it along with mucus. The 
petechial haemorrhages may be seen. It must be 
remembered that arsenic may be found in stomach 
even if it has been given by any route other than 
oral, as arsenic is re-excreted in the stomach and 
intestine. Ulceration may be seen. The small 
intestine is also found to be congested into large 
flakes of mucosa. The liver, spleen and kidneys are 
congested. Petechial haemorrhages may be seen in 
heart, lungs, liver and brain. In poisoning by 
arseniuretted hydrogen, the skin colour may be 
yellow. The mucous membrane of stomach and 
small intestine may be yellow coloured and 
inflamed. Oedema may be seen in lungs. 

Chronic Poisoning 

It usually occurs in workers involved in smeltering 
and refining of ores, in the subliming of white 
arsenic in the manufacture of sheep-dips, weed 
killers, insecticides, paints, dyes, etc. It has also 
been reported in patients who have been taking 
medicines containing arsenic for a long time. 


CFMT-32 (3rd Proof).p65 


261 


8/12/07, 9:44 AM 


















262 Concise Textbook of Forensic Medicine and Toxicology 


Sometimes, chronic poisoning develops following 

acute poisoning when a large dose has been taken. 

Symptoms 

There are four stages described: 

First stage: Mainly gastrointestinal 
symptoms like loss of appetite, salivation, 
colicky pain, constipation or diarrhoea and 
vomiting. Marked weight loss may be seen. 
The tongue may be coated with white, 
silvery fur. Mild fever may be seen. 
Second stage: Generalised or localised 
finely mottled pigmentation of skin diffuse 
in nature or rain drop-like patchy 
appearance may be seen. Skin toxicity is 
seen as persistent erythematous flush 
leading to hyperkeratotic skin and 
desquamation. Hyperkeratosis is most 
prominent in the distal parts of the body. A 
diffuse desquamation of palms and soles is 
seen. The nails become brittle and show 
linear pigmentation in the form of Mees’s 
lines. Perforation of nasal septum may be 
seen. Dryness is commonly seen in throat 
and larynx. Voice becomes hoarse. 
Photophobia with conjunctival congestion 
may be seen. Liver may be enlarged or 
become cirrhotic. 

Third stage: In this stage, sensory 
symptoms predominate. Muscle cramps, 
muscle weakness, arthralgia and marked 
tenderness of body muscles may be seen. 
Knee jerks are absent. Impotence may be 
there. Bone marrow depression and anaemia 
are seen. There is an interference with 
absorption of folic acid. 

Fourth stage: Peripheral neuropathy and 
muscular atrophy are seen. There is marked 
muscular weakness, ataxia and atrophy of 
the extensor muscles leading to “wrist drop” 
and “foot drop”. The interossei and 
intercostal muscles are affected. Anaemia 
and leucopenia are there. Anaemia is 
normocytic and normochromic, and is 


caused as a result of haemolysis. 
Karyorrhexis an accelerated pyknosis of the 
normoblast nucleus is characteristic and is 
manifested by bizarre nuclear forms seen 
on bone marrow examination. Basophilic 
stippling may also be seen. Megaloblastic 
anaemia picture may emerge due to folate 
metabolism interference. Respiratory 
muscle involvement may lead to death. 

Treatment 

Patient should be removed from the source of 
poison. BAL must be administered intramuscularly 
six hourly for 2-3 days, then one per day. Early 
treatment help reducing the harmful effects in toxic 
encephalopathy. Vitamins should be given to take 
care of peripheral neuritis. General measures should 
be initiated to take care of health. 

Poisoninng by Organic Compounds 
of Arsenic 

The organic compounds of arsenic are either in 
trivalent or pentavalent form of arsenic. They are 
less poisonous than inorganic compounds of 
arsenic. The main clinical features are anaphylactic 
reaction, skin reaction, hepatitis and jaundice. Optic 
atrophy is seen in pentavalent compounds. 
Encephalitis may be seen. These compounds are 
generally administered intravenously . Fatty 
degeneration of liver may be seen on post-mortem 
appearance. In chronic poisoning, peripheral nerves 
may show fragmentation on microscopic 
examination. 

Chemical Tests of Arsenic 
Reinsch’s Test 

It may detect arsenic in very low doses up to the 
extent of one in seven million part. 

Procedure: Bright copper foil is kept in the 
suspected solution which has been acidified by 
adding hydrochloric acid and is boiled for 10 
minutes. The copper foil would be coated steel grey 


CFMT-32 (3rd Proof).p65 


262 


8/12/07, 9:44 AM 


















Irritant Poisons—Metallic Poisons (Inorganic) 263 


or black due to deposit of arsenic if present. The 
foil is then removed. It is washed successively with 
water, alcohol and ether, dried on filter paper and 
then heated by placing it in a small test tube. The 
deposit, if it is due to arsenic, will evaporate and 
will form a white deposit in cooler position of the 
tube. If this deposit is seen under a microscope, 
octahedral crystals of arsenious oxide would be seen. 

Marsh’s Test 

This is also a very delicate test that can detect 
arsenic in very small concentration. 

Procedure: This test is based on formation of 
arseniuretted hydrogen when compounds of arsenic 
except metal and its sulphide are brought in contact 
with nascent oxygen. In this, suspected mixture of 
arsenic is put into Woulff’s tub which is a hydrogen 
generating bottle in which zinc and dilute sulphuric 
acid are dropped. This tub is connected to a long 
glass tube which ends in a jet. When nascent oxygen 
comes out, a flame can be applied and it would 
burn with pale blue flame. If arsenic is present in 
the mixture, arseniuretted hydrogen would be 
formed and it would burn with a bluish or greenish 
violet or purple colour. Garlic-like odour may also 
be appreciated. A control test must be run to avoid 
wrong results as sometimes zinc and sulphuric acid 
may have arsenic as impurity. 

Gutzeit Test 

The suspected solution is kept in a large test tube 
with pure zinc and sulphuric or hydrochloric acid 
containing potassium iodide to colour it yellow as 
to remove sulphur oxide and hydrogen sulphide if 
formed. The mouth of the tube is covered with a 
filter paper moistened with silver nitrate. If arsenic 
is present in the suspected solution it would turn 
yellow owing to formation of a double compound 
of silver arsenide and silver nitrate. If water is 
added. The yellow colour becomes black by 
separation of silver. In modified Gutzeit test, the 
filter paper is permeated with mercuric chloride 
instead of silver nitrate. It produces yellow stain. It 
turns red if hydrochloric acid is put on it. 


Medico-legal Significance of 
Arsenic Poisoning 

The medico-legal significance of arsenic poisoning 
is as follows: 

1. Whether Poisoning is Suicidal, Homicidal 
or Accidental: Arsenic is widely used for 
homicidal purpose all over the world as it is 
cheap, easily available and can be easily 
mixed with food as it does not mask the 
smell and taste of the food. Sometimes, low 
doses of arsenic are given slowly over a long 
period of time so that death of the person 
may appear to be natural. Many wives have 
got rid of their husbands by this method. 
Many big political leaders and kings have 
been poisoned slowly by mixing arsenic in 
their food. 

Arsenic is less used for suicidal purpose 
as the person may survive even with large 
doses. In some cases the person may survive 
even with fatal dose as the poison may come 
out completely in vomitus. Arsenic is also 
used as an abortifacient both with internal 
administration and with local application in 
the form of a paste on a stick. Most of such 
abortions are criminal ones, done by local 
quacks. Accidental poisoning with arsenic 
is also common, in workers in industries 
where arsenic is used. Accidental poisoning 
can occur in children if they consume fly 
papers. Accidental poisoning can occur if 
a medicine containing arsenic has been 
taken for a long time. Poisoning by 
arseniuretted hydrogen is generally 
accidental in industrial workers. 

2. Tolerance to Arsenic: Some people like 
sadhus consume arsenic on a daily basis and 
are called arsenophagists. These people get 
tolerance to high levels of arsenic. Some 
people in India consume arsenic on regular 
basis as aphrodisiac, although this 
perception is wrong. Some people take 
arsenic thinking that it would improve their 


CFMT-32 (3rd Proof).p65 


263 


8/12/07, 9:44 AM 


















264 Concise Textbook of Forensic Medicine and Toxicology 


looks and health but it too, is not correct. 
All these people suffer from mild chronic 
arsenic poisoning. 

3. Elimination of Arsenic: Arsenic is 
eliminated from body through urine, stools, 
hair and nails and to some extent through 
sweat, saliva, bile, bronchial secretion and 
milk. If we can divide hair into successive 
lengths from root upward and analyse them 
separately, we can get information regarding 
the time elapsed since arsenic had been 
given. If arsenic is not given during certain 
period, it would not appear in the length of 
hair formed in that duration of time. The 
growth of hair is about one cm in 28 days. 
From that we can calculate the time when 
the arsenic was given. By neutron activation 
analysis of hair, we can find out the amount 
of arsenic ingested during that time. 

4. Deposition of Arsenic: Arsenic gets 
deposited in bones due to conversion of the 
phosphates present in the bones into 
arsenates. So, it is very essential that long 
bones must be preserved if chronic arsenic 
poisoning is suspected. In acute poisoning, 
the arsenic gets deposited in liver. The 
greatest concentration of arsenic is seen in 
hair and nails where it is stored permanently. 
Hair and nails must be preserved in any 
suspected arsenic poisoning. 

5. Effect on Decomposition: It has been 
found that arsenic retards decomposition 
and as a result, the body remains preserved 
for a long time. 

6. Post-mortem Imbibitions: Arsenic is not a 
normal constituent of body although it is 
commonly present in ground water, vegetables 
and soil. It is possible that once dead body is 
buried, some amount of post-mortem 
imbibition may start. In all cases of 
exhumation, control samples of soil from 
above, below and sides of the dead body 
should be taken for comparison of arsenic 
levels found in it, if any, although post-mortem 


imbibition is not so much as to produce signs 
of ulceration and congestion in the stomach 
which is a vital ante-mortem sign. 

MERCURY 

The mercury exists in three forms: metal, inorganic 
salt and organic salts. The inorganic salts are mainly 
mercurous and mercuric salts while organic salts 
are alkyls and aryls. Mercuric salts are more toxic 
than mercurous salts. 

Elemental Mercury 

It is a liquid metal, silvery lustre, volatile at room 
temperature. Its fumes are odourless and invisible. 
It is used in making thermometers, barometers, 
mercury vapour lamps and in electrical industry. It 
is also used in gastroenterology equipment. 

Clinical Features 

When elemental mercury is ingested, it is not 
absorbed well by the gut. It is seen that ingestion 
of elemental mercury is not at all harmful to the 
body except some local irritation. Mercury may get 
stored in appendix, which may later inflame and 
appendicectomy may be required. On X-ray 
examination, mercury can be seen as small, 
rounded, opaque globules of diameter less than 
3 mm. Systemic toxicity can only occur if there is 
an injury in gastrointestinal tract. Some ointments 
contain elemental mercury. If these ointments are 
applied in heavy doses all over the body, systemic 
toxicity can occur. The clinical features are 
headache, vertigo, followed by generalised itchy 
lesions, fever and gingivo-stomatitis. 

The mercury poisoning can occur through 
inhalation when the metal is heated in a closed room 
just as in gold ore purification. The symptoms 
include dyspnoea, cough, fever, nausea, diarrhoea, 
abdominal cramps, chest pain and blurring of 
vision. There is a metallic taste in the mouth. If it 
continues, pulmonary involvement may be there. 
There may be pneumonia, pulmonary oedema and 


CFMT-32 (3rd Proof).p65 


264 


8/12/07, 9:44 AM 


















Irritant Poisons—Metallic Poisons (Inorganic) 265 


death. The chronic inhalation of mercury may cause 
painful extremities commonly called acrodynia. 
There may be anorexia, weight loss, irritability, 
redness of fingers and photophobia. 

Sometimes, mercury may enter circulation by 
mistake in clinical practice through intravenous 
injection while taking arterial blood gas sampling 
with syringes which contain elemental mercury as 
seal. Peripheral mobilisation may be seen and 
gangrene may be observed in distal phalanges 
where mercury is lodged. 

Treatment 

If elemental mercury is ingested, laxatives are given 
and X-rays are repeated after 2-3 days. It takes 
about 6 weeks for the mercury to leave. In local 
application, chelation therapy with BAL and 
D-penicillamine may be done if toxicity is seen. In 
inhalation, treatment is supportive and chelation can 
be done, if required. 

Inorganic Salts of Mercury 

The common compounds of inorganic salts of 
mercury which produce toxicity are as follows: 

1. Mercuric Oxide: It is red or yellow 
crystalline powder. It is insoluble in water. 

2. Mercuric Chloride: It is also known as 
corrosive sublimate. It is heavy, colourless 
mass of prismatic crystals or a white 
crystalline powder. It is used as an 
antiseptic quite commonly in clinical 
practice, and is applied on cuts, abrasions, 
etc. When ammonia is added to a watery 
solution of mercuric chloride, ammoniated 
chlorine of mercury is produced which is 
used in preparation of some medical 
ointments. 

3. Mercuric Sulphide: It is the chief ore of 
mercury and is artificially prepared as red 
powder, which is commonly known as 
sindoor or vermilion pigment. It is 
commonly used by women in India on head 


as a religious practice of married women. It 
is considered as non-poisonous. 

4. Mercuric Sulphate: It is white in colour 
and acts as a corrosive. 

5. Mercurous Chloride: It is sold in market 
as vas Kapoor. It is heavy, white mass often 
mixed with mercuric chloride. Previously 
it was used as teething powder of young 
children. 

Fatal Period 

3-5 days. 

Fatal Dose 

1-4 gm is fatal dose for mercuric chloride. Local 
application of 7-10 gm of mercuric oxide on open 
lesions is fatal. 

Clinical Features 

Inorganic mercurial compounds produce toxicity by 
ingestion, inhalation or absorption through skin. 
These compounds do not cross blood-brain barrier. 
Kidneys and colon are the worst affected. Corrosive 
action on alimentary canal causes nausea, vomiting, 
burning, and necrosis. Acute renal failure sets in. 
The person may die due to fluid loss and shock. 
Acute pulmonary oedema, coma, muscle tremors 
and generalised hypertonia may be seen. In pregnant 
women, abortion may occur. In neonates, renal, 
dysfunction, cataract and anaemia may be seen. 
Gangrenous colitis may be seen after 6 days. 

Laboratory Diagnosis 

Toxic blood mercury levels are seen as 3 mg/dl and 
urinary levels up to 100-300 mg/1. 

Treatment 

Gastric lavage is indicated. Administer milk or egg 
white and later activated charcoal may be given. 
Chelation therapy with BAL or penicillamine is the 
main treatment. Hemodialysis and peritoneal dialysis 
is quite useful. Plasma exchange can also be 


CFMT-32 (3rd Proof).p65 


265 


8/12/07, 9:44 AM 


















266 Concise Textbook of Forensic Medicine and Toxicology 


considered. If renal failure is seen, chelation therapy 
is not much useful. In such cases Extra corporeal 
Regional Complexing Hemodialysis (ERCH) is 
quite useful. In this, chelating agent DMSA (2,3- 
dimercaptosuccinic acid) is injected into arterial 
bloodline of the dialyser. It causes redistribution of 
metal from protein binding sites to a complexed 
diffusible form which readily passes through the 
dialyser membrane. So, both metal complex and 
chelating agent are removed from the body. 

Post-mortem Findings 

The corrosive action would be seen in the 
alimentary canal if a large dose is given; otherwise 
symptoms of irritant poisoning would be seen. The 
large intestine, caecum, colon and rectum are found 
inflamed and ulcerated, and may show gangrene if 
the patient has lived for some days. Liver, spleen 
and kidneys are congested. The stomach may show 
congestion, necrosis or even perforation. Post¬ 
mortem lesions in alimentary canal are seen even 
in those cases where the corrosive sublimate has 
been given by external route. 

Chronic Poisoning 

Chronic poisoning occurs in factory workers who 
are exposed to vapours or dust of mercury while 
working. It is also seen in patients who use 
ointments for a long time which contain mercury. 
Blood levels above 100 llgm per 100 ml of blood 
are indicative of poisoning. 

Symptoms 

Abdominal symptoms like nausea, colic pain and 
vomiting are seen. A brownish blue line is seen in 
gums at the junction of teeth. The swollen gums, 
painful salivary glands, bad mouth odour and 
necrosis of jaw may be seen. Other symptoms are: 

1. Mercuria Lentis: A brownish reflex from 
anterior lens capsule of both eyes when seen 
through slit lamp, called mercuria lentis is 
observed. It is due to brownish deposit of 
mercury on anterior lens capsule. Skin 


eruptions of erythematous and eczematous 
nature with some thickening of skin of hands 
and feet are seen. 

2. Mercurial Tremors or Hatters Shake 
Tremors: These are coarse tremors seen on 
fingers first and tongue later. The 
stammering or hesitation of speech is seen. 
Later, the tremors develop in muscles of 
face, arms and legs. These tremors are 
absent while asleep. They are increased 
when voluntary movements are done. 
Movements are incoordinated. Peripheral 
neuritis may be seen. 

3. Erethism: These are mental symptoms 
which develop in workers in factories 
producing mirrors. The person may be 
irritable, mentally depressed, loss of 
memory found, and, he may be mentally 
confused. Hallucinations may be seen 
followed by insanity. 

Treatment 

The workers should be removed from the 
surroundings immediately. The dental hygiene 
should be taken care of. Chelation therapy with 
BAL is quite useful. 

Organic Compounds of Mercury 

The organic compounds of mercury are of two 
types: aryl and alkyl mercury compounds. The aryl 
mercury compounds are degraded into inorganic 
mercury in the body while alkyl mercury 
compounds remain as organic compounds. 

Clinical Features 

Poisoning by organic compounds of mercury 
produces following clinical features: 

1. Methyl Mercury: It is used as fungicide. It 
is absorbed from gastrointestinal tract 
completely. The main features are CNS 
symptoms like neuropathies, inco¬ 
ordination, tunnel vision, mental 
deterioration, hearing loss, tremors, and 


CFMT-32 (3rd Proof).p65 


266 


8/12/07, 9:44 AM 


















Irritant Poisons—Metallic Poisons (Inorganic) 267 


finally coma. Local application may 
produce dermatitis and irritation. 

2. Ethyl Mercury: In addition to the above, 
renal damage and gastrointestinal symptoms 
are seen. 

3 . Phenyl Mercury : The common route is oral 
ingestion. It produces symptoms that 
resemble inorganic compounds poisoning. 

4. Mercurochrome: It is widely used in 
clinical practice as it has bacteriostatic 
properties. It was previously given in 
controlling infection by intravenous route. 
It can cause acute nephritis, intestinal 
lesions, fever and death. 

Treatment 

The treatment of organic mercurial compound is 
mainly supportive. Chelation therapy is not useful in 
methyl mercury poisoning. In cases of aryl mercury 
compounds, chelation therapy is useful. Penicillamine 
is more effective than BAL in such cases. 

COPPER 

The copper salts act on the body by precipitating 
proteins. The following salts are important from 
medico-legal point. 

1. Copper Sulphate: It is also commonly 
called Nila thotha or blue vitriol. The 
chemical formula is CuS0 4 . It is blue 
crystalline powder freely soluble in water 
having a styptic taste. It can be given as an 
emetic in low doses but it is an irritant when 
given in large doses. 

2. Copper Carbonate: It occurs in malachite 
in nature. It is obtained when carbonate of 
sodium is added to a solution of copper 
sulphate. 

3. Copper Subacetate: It is frequently used 
in medicine and arts. 

Acute Poisoning 

Symptoms start within 15-30 minutes of 
consumption. There is severe vomiting, nausea, 
thirst, metallic taste in mouth, burning pain and 


salivation. The vomited matter is blue or green in 
colour and it can be differentiated from bile by 
addition of ammonium hydroxide when the colour 
changes to deep blue. There may be diarrhoea. 
Oliguria, hematuria, albuminuria and uremia may 
be seen. Jaundice is common. The person dies of 
shock. 

Fatal Dose 

15 gm of copper sulphate is sufficient to kill a 
person. 

Fatal Period 

1-3 days. 

Treatment 

Gastric lavage should be immediately done. It 
should be done with one per cent solution of 
potassium ferrocyanide to form insoluble cupric 
ferrocyanide which is harmless. Milk or egg white 
can be given as antidote. The albumin present 
would form insoluble harmless salt as albuminate 
of copper. Chelation therapy with BAL is 
recommended. In case of renal failure, dialysis 
should be done. The supportive treatment in form 
of fluids is essential. Ascorbic acid and methylene 
blue should be used for methaemoglobinaemia. 

Post-mortem Appearance 

The skin may be yellow due to jaundice. Greenish 
froth may be seen at mouth or nostrils. The mucosa 
of gastrointestinal tract is congested, swollen and 
may show ulcerations. The stomach contents are 
green or blue. The liver would be enlarged and may 
show necrosis. 

Chronic Poisoning 

The chronic poisoning is seen in workers in 
industries where copper dust or fumers are there. 

Symptoms 

Greenish or purple line on gums, a coppery taste 
in mouth, nausea, dyspepsia, vomiting, diarrhoea 


CFMT-32 (3rd Proof).p65 


267 


8/12/07, 9:44 AM 


















268 Concise Textbook of Forensic Medicine and Toxicology 


with colic in abdomen may be seen. Renal damage 
may be seen. Peripheral neuritis, congestion and 
ulceration of cornea may be seen. Jaundice would 
be commonly seen. The hair, urine and sweat may 
be green coloured. 

Treatment 

The person should be removed from the site. The 
conservative treatment should be started. 

Medico-legal Significance 

Copper as a metal is non-poisonous. The copper 
sulphate is consumed with the purpose of 
committing suicide. Its strong metallic taste and 
blue colour makes it unfit for homicidal purpose. 
Accidental consumption can occur. 

LEAD 

The following preparations of lead are commonly 
used. 

1. Lead Acetate: It is also known as ‘sugar of 
lead or Salt of Saturn’. It is white mass of 
acicular crystals having sweet, astringent 
taste. When dissolved in water it forms acid 
solution. In old days, it was used to sweeten 
wine. 

2. Lead Subacetate: It is the chief constituent 
of Goulard’s extract which is a colourless 
liquid with a sweet, astringent taste and is 
alkaline in reaction. 

3. Lead Carbonate: It is white, crystalline 
powder, insoluble in water but soluble in 
acids. It is extensively used as pigment in 
oil painting in basic carbonate form, 
commonly called Safeda. It is also used as 
an ointment. 

4. Lead Nitrate: It is used in calico printing. 
It is a crystalline powder soluble in water. 

5. Lead Chromate: It is bright yellow 
insoluble powder used as pigment. It is 
known as ‘chrome yellow’. Some cases of 
poisoning have been reported when it is 
used to colour sweetmeats. 


6. Lead Sulphate: This is heavy white powder 
insoluble in water. It is nonpoisonous. 

7. Lead Chloride: It is white, needle-shaped 
crystal which is quite soluble in hot water 
but less in cold water. When it is heated with 
air, it is converted into oxychloride which 
is employed as white pigment, known as 
‘Pattison’s white lead’. The yellow 
oxychloride is obtained by heating lead 
oxide and ammonium chloride. It is known 
as ‘cassel yellow’ and is used as pigment. 

8. Lead Iodide: It is tasteless, odourless, 
yellow powder soluble more in hot water 
than cold. 

9. Lead Sulphide: It is found in the form of 
cubic crystals. It is sold in markets as surma 
in place of sulphide of antimony which is 
used as collyrium for the eyes. 

10. Lead Monoxide: It is pale brick red or 
orange scaly mass sometimes used by 
quacks for treating syphylis. It is also used 
by printers and glaziers and is also a 
constituent of some hair dyes. 

11. Lead Tetraoxide: It is also known as 
Sindoor. It is scarlet, crystalline powder used 
as pigment. It is insoluble in water. It is used 
as vermilion but most often, vermilion is 
mercuric sulphide. 

12. Tetraethyl Lead: It was added to prevent 
knocking in petrol. Now, it is not added and 
petrol available now is free from lead. 

Acute Poisoning 

Lead acetate is the most common salt that causes 
acute poisoning. The following symptoms are seen: 

A sweet, metallic astringent taste in mouth along 
with burning sensation in throat and stomach, 
salivation and intense thirst are seen immediately 
after ingestion. Vomiting starts within 30 minutes. 
Colic in abdomen starts with tenderness in abdomen. 
Constipation is seen. Urine becomes scanty. The 
features of peripheral shock start appearing with cold 
clammy skin, feeble rapid pulse and shock. 
Drowsiness, headache, muscular cramps and 


CFMT-32 (3rd Proof).p65 


268 


8/12/07, 9:44 AM 


















Irritant Poisons—Metallic Poisons (Inorganic) 269 


convulsions may be seen. Paralysis of lower limbs 
may be seen. Death may occur. In acute poisoning 
with tetraethyl lead, central nervous symptoms are 
the main features. Irritability, insomnia, headache, 
vertigo, muscular weakness, bradycardia, 
hypotension and convulsions may be seen. 

Sub-acute form: The sub-acute poisoning 
occurs when small doses of lead acetate are taken 
repeatedly for a long time. Blue line is observed 
on the gums. Gastrointestinal symptoms as 
mentioned above are seen. The nervous symptoms 
are very prominent. Numbness, vertigo, cramps and 
paralysis of lower limbs may be seen. Death is rare 
but may occur due to convulsions and coma. 

Fatal Dose 

20 gm of lead acetate is fatal. About 45 gm of lead 
carbonate is fatal. A maximum daily intake of 
5 Llgm of lead per kg body weight is permissible. 

Fatal Period 

2-3 days is an average fatal period. 

Treatment 

Gastric lavage should be started immediately with 
one per cent magnesium or sodium sulphate 
solution. Emetics can be given to induce vomiting. 
Magnesium sulphate can be given orally to rapidly 
remove lead from the intestines. The intravenous 
fluid should be given. Morphine may be given to 
relieve pain. Chelation therapy should be started. 
Ethylene diamine tetra-acetic acid (EDTA) is 
preferred as it forms with lead non-toxic, non- 
ionised, non-metabolised compounds which are 
excreted in urine. The patient should be hospitalised 
and intravenous solution of calcium disodium 
versenate (calcium disodium ethylenediamine) 
should be started. Daily dose of 80 mg/kg for an 
adult may be given in divided doses for 5 days. It 
may be combined with intramuscular injection of 
BAL 15-30 mg/kg/day for better prognosis. 
Urine outflow should be maintained by infusing 
saline. Intracranial pressure should be maintained 
by giving mannitol, steroids and hypothermia. The 


nutritional supplements like vitamin D, vitamin C 
and diet rich in calcium with milk should be given. 

Post-mortem Appearance 

The signs of irritation in stomach and intestines 
may be seen. The mucosa may be thickened and 
softened with white deposit. Erosion patches may 
be seen. The organs would be congested. 

Chronic Poisoning (Plumbism or Saturnism) 

The chronic poisoning is very common among 
workers in factories where lead and its products 
are widely used. The chronic poisoning occurs in 
paint sprayers, compositors, plumbers, enamel 
workers, glass blowers, electric light workers, lead 
ore refiners, etc. It may also result from taking food 
contaminated due to storage in vessels containing 
lead. It may also be due to drinking ground water 
containing lead, use of hair dyes and cosmetics. 
Chronic lead poisoning can also occur due to 
absorption from skin too. The women who are using 
red lead as vermilion may get poisoning in due 
course of time. 

Clinical Features 

The following are the main clinical features: 

1. Gastrointestinal Symptoms: Severe colic 
relieved by pressure, constipation, anorexia 
and metallic taste are common. Intermittant 
vomiting may be seen. 

2. Lead line or Burtonian Line: A stippled 
blue line is seen on the junction of the gums 
and teeth usually on upper jaw. It is due to 
deposition of lead sulphide, formed as a 
reaction of lead and hydrogen sulphide, 
which in turn, is formed as a result of 
decomposition of food in a bad oral hygiene 
person. Metallic taste in mouth and bad 
odour is observed. 

3. Anaemia: Marked punctate basophilia, 
hypochromia and retieulocytosis is seen. 
Due to lead there is impairment in the 
synthesis of heme from protoporphyrin and 


CFMT-32 (3rd Proof).p65 


269 


8/12/07, 9:44 AM 


















270 Concise Textbook of Forensic Medicine and Toxicology 


of porphobilinogen from aminolaevulinic 
acid. There is increased fragility of RBCs 
due to loss of intracellular potassium, which 
in turn, is due to increased permeability of 
the cell membrane. The basophilic stippling 
of the RBCs is due to condensation of iron 
containing ribonucleic acid near the 
mitochondria. These are stained with basic 
dyes and hence the name is given. Platelets 
are decreased. The children are more 
susceptible to develop anaemia. 

4. Paralysis: Typical paralysis involves the 
extensor muscles of finger and wrist except 
the supinator longus, causes ‘wrist drop’ and 
‘claw-shaped hand’. When it is spread to 
extensor muscles of foot, it causes ‘foot 
drop’. Axonal degeneration causes 
peripheral motor neuropathy. There is no 
sensory involvement. Extra ocular muscles 
are also affected. Tremors and pain in large 
joints are seen. 

5. Encephalopathy: It develops when blood 
lead levels are more than 100 mg/dl and is 
usually seen in children. It can develop even 
after some time has passed off lead ingestion 
as lead releases into the system from the 
stored sites. Vomiting, irritability, 
clumsiness and loss of recently acquired 
development skills is seen. Abnormal jerky 
movements and ataxia may be there. Later, 
stupor, coma, convulsions and death may 
follow. CSF examination would show high 
protein and mononuclear cell counts. 
Permanent neurological deficits like poor 
performance in studies, mental retardation, 
optic neuropathy, hyperkinesias and 
cerebral palsy may be seen. 

6. Facial Pallor: Circumoral facial pallor is 
characteristic. It may be due to vasospasm 
although anaemia is also responsible for it. 

7. CVS and Renal Manifestations: High 
blood pressure and arteriosclerotic changes 
are seen. Urine contains albumin and high 
amount of lead, coproporphyrin-III and 


deamino-laevulinic acid. Interstitial 
nephritis may be seen. Menstrual problems 
like menorrhagia, metrorrhagia, and 
abortions are seen. Still birth may be seen. 
Sterility may be there in men and women. 

Diagnosis 

For diagnosis of chronic lead poisoning, the 
quantitative estimation of lead in urine and blood 
should be done. The urine lead values are more 
than 0.08 mg/litre of blood when measured on 24 
hour urine collection. The blood values are above 
0.8 mg/litre of blood. Glycosuria is seen in children. 
For screening of lead toxicity, blood estimations 
of coproporphyrin and delta amino-laevulinic acid 
are done. A blood lead level of more than 30 mg/dl 
is indicative of undue lead absorption. Erythrocyte 
protoporphyrin levels less than 50 mg/dl are normal. 
EP levels are elevated in chronic lead poisoning 
but may be normal in acute lead poisoning. 
Elevation of EP levels are also seen in iron 
deficiency, chronic infections and haemolytic 
anaemias. In chronic poisoning, an abdominal 
X-ray can demonstrate flecks of lead paint. An X- 
ray of long bones may show ‘lead lines’ which are 
bands of increased density, and can be seen within 
days of ingestion. Calcium EDTA mobilisation test 
can be done. In this, EDTA is administered 
intramuscularly in two doses in a day. The urine is 
collected for 24 hours and lead concentration 
measured. If lead (pg)/Ca EDTA (mg) ratio is 
greater than one, it reflects five-fold increase in 
body lead burden and indicates poisoning. 

Treatment 

The person should be removed from the influence 
of the poison. The convulsions should be treated 
with anticonvulsants. Intracranial pressure should 
be controlled by giving mannitol and steroids. The 
urine outflow should be encouraged by giving 
fluids. If lead levels are 50-70 mg/dl and the patient 
is asymptomatic, the chelation therapy should be 
started with calcium EDTA 1000 mg/sq m/24 hours 
in divided doses intramuscularly at least for 5 days. 


CFMT-32 (3rd Proof).p65 


270 


8/12/07, 9:44 AM 


















Irritant Poisons—Metallic Poisons (Inorganic) 271 


A second course can be given after a gap of 2 
days. After the second course, penicillamine in a 
dose of 600 mg/sq.m/day can be given till blood 
lead level and EP levels are normal. If blood lead 
levels are more than 70 mg/ dl, chelation therapy 
should be a combination of calcium EDTA and 
BAL immediately. Combined therapy produces 
better excretion of lead. 

If encephalopathy is present, BAL and calcium 
EDTA are administered for 5-7 days. The dose of 
calcium EDTA is 1500 mg/sq m/day and that of 
BAL is 450 mg/sq m/day. 

Remove the retained lead pellets or bullets as 
much as you can, if they are producing the lead 
toxicity. 

Post-mortem Appearance 

A blue line along the margins of gums can be seen. 
The paralysis may be evident in form of flaccid, 
atrophy of muscles. Renal tubular necrosis may be 
seen. The liver and kidneys may be found to be 
hard and contracted. The rest of the findings are 
non-specific. 

Medico-legal Significance 

The medico-legal significance of lead poisoning is 
as follows: 

1. Lead in the metallic form is not poisonous 
unless it is acted upon by intestinal 
secretions. When ingested, it can act as a 
poison as the metal is converted into salt 
and is absorbed. Such kind of poisoning can 
occur in workers working in soldering, 
plumbing, alloys, toys, ceramic, paint, and 
foil paper industries. 

2. Retained lead bullets and pellets when 
embedded in tissues may produce poisoning 
over the years. 

3. Acute lead poisoning is rare and usually the 
person recovers from it. Chronic lead 
poisoning is very common. 

4. Lead is also sometimes used as an 
abortifacient criminally. Abortion sticks 
contain red lead as the main ingredient. 


5. Red lead may also be used as a cattle poison. 

6. Accidental poisonings are common with 
salts of lead. 

ISOPROPANOL 

It is also called ‘Blue Heaven or Isopropyl Alcohol’. 
It is colourless, volatile fluid with a faint smell of 
acetone. It has a bitter taste. It is commonly used 
in massage as rubbing alcohol. It is also used as 
disinfectant, paint remover, used in aftershave 
lotions, hair tonics, used as industrial solvent, etc. 

Clinical Symptoms 

Isopropanol is a very strong CNS depressant. The 
common clinical features are lethargy, vertigo, 
headache, confusion, ataxia, miosis, gastritis, 
abdominal pain, etc. Later, hypotension and apnoea 
may be seen. Myopathy, haemolytic anaemia and 
renal failure are also reported. Smell of acetone can 
be appreciated in breath. 

Once the isopropanol is ingested, it is converted 
to acetone by alcohol dehydrogenase enzyme. 
Acetone is excreted in urine and breath. Laboratory 
findings show ketonuria and metabolic acidosis. 

Fatal Dose 

250-350 ml. 

Treatment 

Immediately, gastric lavage should be done and 
activated charcoal may be left after lavage. Rest of 
the treatment is supportive. Metabolic acidosis 
should be corrected. Skin decontamination is 
required if isopropanol is applied on the skin. 

ETHYLENE GLYCOL 

It is a colourless, odourless, non-volatile fluid and 
has a bitter sweet taste. It is used as an antifreeze, 
coolant in automobiles and hydraulic brake fluid 
in machinery. 


CFMT-32 (3rd Proof).p65 


271 


8/12/07, 9:44 AM 


















272 Concise Textbook of Forensic Medicine and Toxicology 


Mechanism of Action 

Once absorbed through gut on ingestion, it is 
converted to glycoaldehyde, glycolic acid and 
oxalic acid which inhibits oxidative phosphorylation. 
Metabolic pathways are affected. 

Clinical Features 

There are three stages described according to the 
time of ingestion. There are: 

1 . Up to 12 Hours: The common symptoms 
are vomiting, lethargy, nystagmus, ataxia, 
convulsions and coma. 

2. Up to 24 Hours: It is due to effect on 
cardiovascular system. Tachycardia, 
tachypnoea, congestive heart failure, and 
shock may be seen. 

3. From 24 to 72 Hours: It is due to effect on 
renal system. Oliguria, acute tubular 
necrosis and renal failure are seen. 

The laboratory findings are acidosis, 
calcium oxalate crystals in urine and 
hypocalcaemia may be seen. If examined 
underWood’s lamp, the urine will fluoresce 
if the antifreeze has been taken. 

Fatal Dose 

70-100 ml. 

Treatment 

Gastric lavage should be done immediately and 
activated charcoal may be left after lavage. Ethyl 
alcohol is the antidote and is given in the same 
manner as mentioned in methyl alcohol poisoning. 
It inhibits the metabolism of ethylene glycol by 
competitive inhibition as competing for the same 
enzyme, alcohol dehydrogenase. 4-methyl 
pyrazole can also be used. Calcium gluconate can 
be given to correct hypocalcaemia. Rest of the 
treatment is on supportive lines. Hemodialysis can 
be done. 


IRON 

Iron poisoning occurs in children due to accidental 
ingestion of higher doses of iron preparations used 
in clinical practice. The common preparations 
which are used clinically, are ferrous fumarate (cap. 
Autrin), ferrous sulphate (cap. Fefol), ferrous 
choline (cap. Ferrochelate) and ferric ammonium 
citrate (liquid phosfomin). 

The poisoning mostly occurs due to 
consumption of high doses of these preparations. 

Symptoms 

There are four stages of iron poisoning which are 
as follows: 

Stage I: It occurs within 6 hours of ingestion. The 
initial symptoms are nausea, vomiting, diarrhoea 
and gastrointestinal haemorrhage. Perforation and 
intestinal necrosis may be seen. Shock may be seen. 
CNS effects include lethargy and coma. 

Stage II: It occurs between 6 and 24 hours, patient 
appears to be stable. Recovery may take place. 

Stage III: This stage is seen only in some 
percentage of cases and show signs of systemic 
toxicity. It occurs in between 12 and 24 hours. The 
chief symptoms are severe metabolic acidosis, 
fever, coma, bleeding disorders, hepatic failure, 
renal failure and shock. 

Stage IV: Intestinal obstruction and scarring may 
be seen after some weeks. 

Fatal Dose 

200-300 mg/kg is the fatal dose while mild to 
moderate intoxication occurs at 20-60 mg/kg and 
severe intoxication at 60 mg/kg. 

Fatal Period 

24-30 hours. 

Treatment 

Case of iron-poisoning can be treated in following 
ways: 


CFMT-32 (3rd Proof).p65 


272 


8/12/07, 9:44 AM 


















Irritant Poisons—Metallic Poisons (Inorganic) 273 


1. Manage the patient conservatively. Secure 
airways and maintain breathing and 
circulation. 

2. Gastric lavage may be done in a conscious 
patient with sodium bicarbonate solution 
and about 100 ml should be left behind after 
lavage. 

3. Chelation therapy with de-feroxamine 
should be done. De-feroxamine in a dose 
of 90 mg/kg should be given 
intramuscularly followed by 90 mg/kg every 
4-12 hours. Exchange transfusion is helpful 
in infants. 

Post-mortem Features 

The gastrointestinal tract would be inflamed and 
congested. It may show perforation and necrosis. 
The liver may show acute hepatic necrosis. 

Medico-legal Significance 

The iron poisoning is mainly accidental from over¬ 
dosage. The poisoning is commonly seen in 
children. Suicidal poisoning is sometimes reported. 
Homicidal poisoning is very rare. 

THALLIUM 

Thallium is a white crystalline metal and is 
extremely toxic. It is odourless and tasteless. These 
qualities make it one of the ideal homicidal poison. 
Thallium is used in manufacture of optical lens and 
in scintillation counters. There are two main 
thallium salts which are in common use. 

1 . Thallium Acetate: It is sometimes used in 
the treatment of ring worm of the scalp. It 
is colourless and odourless. 

2. Thallium Sulphate: It is a potent 
rodenticide and is used for killing rats and 
ants. 

Symptoms 

Nausea, vomiting and severe haemorrhagic 
gastroenteritis are the main features and may 


resemble natural gastroenteritis. Joint pain and 
skeletal muscle pain may be seen. Bone marrow 
depression may be seen. Hepatic and renal failure 
may be seen. Sensorimotor neuropathy, retrobulbar 
neuritis, disturbed colour vision, paraesthesias and 
occasional ophthalmoplegia are the other features 
seen. Myocardial toxicity may be evident in the 
form of hypertension, tachycardia and arrhythmias. 
Delirium, convulsions and coma may be seen. In 
most cases, respiratory failure and shock are the 
causes of death. 

Late complications include alopecia, ataxia, 
choreiform movements, depression, dementia and 
psychosis. Mental retardation has also been 
reported. Rarely, SLE-like features, keratoconj¬ 
unctivitis sicca and Raynaud’s phenomenon have 
been reported. 

Fatal Dose 

12 mg per kg body weight is the minimum lethal 
dose. 

Fatal Period 

24-30 hours. 

Mechanism of Action 

Thallium is highly poisonous and it resembles lead 
in mechanism of action. It acts as an irritant to 
stomach and causes fatty changes in heart and liver. 
It also causes necrosis in kidney. 

Treatment 

Perform gastric lavage with Prussian blue 
(potassium ferric ferrocyanide) as it binds thallium 
in the gut and prevents its absorption. It is usually 
given via duodenal tube along with mannitol. It is 
given in a dose of 125 mg/kg body weight twice 
daily. Forced diuresis is helpful. Activated charcoal 
and saline purgatives can be given to enhance fecal 
excretion. The rest of the treatment is supportive. 
Hemodialysis is not effective. 


CFMT-32 (3rd Proof).p65 


273 


8/12/07, 9:44 AM 


















274 Concise Textbook of Forensic Medicine and Toxicology 


Post-mortem Appearance 

The mucosa lining of stomach is grossly congested 
and haemorrhages may be seen. The liver may show 
fatty changes. The necrosis in kidneys may be seen. 
The heart shows fatty degeneration. The rest of the 
organs are congested. 

Medico-legal Points 

Owing to its tasteless, odourless nature and the 
clinical features it produces, thallium is quite 


close to being called an ideal homicidal poison. 
Suicidal and homicidal cases are reported. On 
X-ray examination, opacity in liver may be seen. 
Death due to gastrointestinal and polyneuritis 
with alopecia should raise suspicion regarding 
thallium poisoning, although, poisoning by 
thallium is rare. Chronic poisoning is seen 
among workers employed in chemical factories 
where thallium is isolated from pyrites 
residues. 


CFMT-32 (3rd Proof).p65 


274 


8/12/07, 9:44 AM 


















CHAPTER 

33 " 

Irritant Poisons—Animal 
Poisons 


CANTHARIDES 

The Spanish fly or blister beetle is a green coloured 
insect which is widely present. When the insect is 
dried up and turned into a powder, a brown coloured 
powder with green particles is obtained. The active 
principle is cantharidin. This principle is freely 
soluble in alcohol but not in water. It is a very strong 
vesicant. The Spanish fly is known as cantharis 
vesicatoria. In India, teleni makhi (Mylabriscichorii) 
is widely prevalent in north India and Kashmir. It 
also contains cantharidin. Other species of teleni 
makhi are also present throughout India. 

Symptoms 

On local application, cantharidin initially does not 
cause any side effects but after 2-3 hours, local 
redness and inflammation is seen which is followed 
by multiple blisters formation. Later, all blisters may 
combine and form a large area of necrosis. When 
ingested, within 2 hours it produces severe burning 
in mouth, throat and stomach. It causes blistering of 
tongue, swollen tongue, intense thirst, increased 
salivation due to inflammation of salivary glands, 
nausea, vomiting and diarrhoea. There is a pain in 
loins, increased frequency of urine, painful priapism 
with swelling and inflammation of genital organs. 
The patient becomes very restless. The person may 
die of peripheral shock with slow, feeble pulse along 
with low blood pressure. The voice of the person 
may become hoarse due to the vocal cord spasm. 


Fatal Dose 

About 1-2 gm. 

Fatal Period 

24-36 hours. 

Treatment 

Gastric lavage should be done immediately. Fluids 
should be started intravenously to avoid 
dehydration. The patient should be managed by 
supportive treatment. 

Post-mortem Appearance 

The green shining particles of powdered insects 
may be found in the stomach and intestine. The 
stomach and intestine may be found to be congested 
and ulcerated. Acute tubular necrosis may be seen. 
Lungs are congested and oedematous. Kidneys are 
congested. 

Medico-legal Significance 

The cantharides are used as aphrodisiac due to their 
tendency to cause priapism. They can also be used 
to produce criminal abortion. It is rarely used for 
suicidal and homicidal purposes. Accidental 
poisoning can occur due to application of blistering 
paper (Charta epispastica). 


CFMT-33 (3rd Proof).p65 


275 


8/12/07, 9:44 AM 


















276 Concise Textbook of Forensic Medicine and Toxicology 


SNAKES (OPHIDIA) 

Every year in India around 2 lakh people are bitten 
by snakes out of which around 15,000 die every year. 
Snakes are poisonous as well as non-poisonous. 
Majority of the snakes are non-poisonous. Majority 
of people die because of fear of death rather than 
snake bite. So, it is very important to reassure the 
person who has been bitten by a snake that it is likely 
that the snake may be a non-poisonous one. If the 
snake is caught dead or alive, it may be ascertained 
by examination whether it is poisonous or not. 

Poisonous Snakes 

The poisonous snakes belong to two families: 
Colubridae and Viperidae. The Colubridae snakes 
lay eggs. Their head is about the same width as the 
neck. The pupils are circular. There are two 
varieties: 



Fig. 33.1 (a) Side view of poisonous snakes, (b) fangs of 
poisonous and non-poisonous snakes. 


1. Elapidae or land or terrestrial snakes. 

2. Hydrophidae or sea snakes. 

Elapidae (Terrestrial Snakes) 

The common Elapidae snakes are cobra, king cobra, 
common krait, banded krait and the vipers 
(Fig. 33.1 and 33.2). 

1. Cobra: It is also called Nag or Kala Samp 
due to its black colour. It occurs throughout 
India. It has a well marked hood. The hood 
may bear on dorsal side a double or single 
spectacle mark. The head of this snake is 
not very distinct from its neck. Its neck 
region dilates to form hood. It expands its 
hood only when it is enraged or about to 
attack. In a dead snake, hood cannot be 
appreciated as neck and joints become stiff. 
The average length is 5-6 feet. To identify 
a cobra following points are noted: 


Poisonous 
snake 
(Pit viper) 




Fig. 33.2 Points to be noted in poisonous 
snakes (for details see text). 


CFMT-33 (3rd Proof).p65 


276 


8/12/07, 9:44 AM 




























Irritant Poisons—Animal Poisons 277 


(a) A small triangular shield commonly called 
cuneate or wedge shield is seen between 
the fourth and fifth infralabial shields. 

(b) Two black spots and three black bands 
may be seen on the central side of hood. 

(c) The caudal scales are double. 

2. King Cobra: It is also called Nag Raj or 
Raj Samp. It is seen in the Himalayas, 
Bengal, Assam and in hills of south India. 
It is bigger than common cobra and may be 
8-12 feet. The hood is less wide but longer 
than common cobra. On the head there are 
four chevron-shaped bars. 

3. Common Krait: It is found all over India. 
The common length is 3-5 feet. It is usually 
steel blue in colour and has narrow single 
or double white arches across the back. 
These arches begin a bit far from the head 
and extend up to the tip of the tail. The belly 
is creamy white in colour. The common krait 
can be identified by the following features: 

(a) The head is covered with large shields. 

(b) Four shields are present on lower lip 
both sides. 

(c) The scales in the central row are large 
and hexagonal till the tail. 

(d) Round tail is seen. 

(e) The plates under the tail are like that 
present on the belly. They are in toto and 
not divided. 

4. Banded Krait: It is larger than common krait. 
It is seen in northeast India. It has alternate jet 
black and deep yellow bands across the back. 

5. Black Krait: It is blue or black in colour 
and devoid of stripes. The ventral side is 
white with black dots. The poison of the 
above snakes is neurotoxic (Table 33.1). 

6. Viperidae: These snakes have broad, 
lozenge-shaped head covered with small 
scales, a narrow neck and a short tail. The 
pupils are vertically slit. They give birth to 
small snakes. They have mobile fangs. 


Vipers are of two types, pit viper and pitless 
viper. Pit vipers are those which have a pit 
or a deep depression on each side of the head 
between the eye and the nostrils. Pitless 
vipers are those which do not have pit on 
the head. They have broad plates on the 
belly. 

(a) Russell’s viper: It is a pitless viper, usually 
called Daboia or Chain viper commonly 
found all over India except in the Ganges 
base. Normal length is 4-5 feet. It is very 
stout. The head is flat, heavy and triangular, 
and has a white v-shaped mark with its apex 
pointing forward. There are three rows of 
black or brown spots along the back. The 
body is white with dark semilunar spots. It 
produces hissing sound loudly and 
continuously when it is ready to attack. This 
snake can be identified by entire broad 
plates on belly, small scales on the head and 
the shield below the tail divided into two 
rows (Fig. 33.3). 

(b) Saw-scaled viper: It is a small snake which 
has a triangular head bearing a typical arrow¬ 
like mark on a brown background. The body 
is brown with a series of pale marks forming 
curves. This snake is commonly found in 
Punjab, Rajasthan, Kashmir and Maharashtra. 
The back is covered with rough scales which 
produce a rustling sound when the snake 
moves. The ridge in the middle of each scale 
is dented like a saw thus giving it the name 
of ‘saw-scaled viper’. The snake is identified 
by broad belly plates, small scales on the head 
and entire shields below the tail. The 
poisonous snakes have two fangs which are 
connected to racemose glands which secrete 
venom through ducts. The venom is used for 
digestion. The glands similar to parotid 
glands. The colubrines have short and fine 
fangs which cannot penetrate through clothes 
while vipers have long and strong fangs which 
can penetrate through clothes (Fig. 33.4). 


CFMT-33 (3rd Proof).p65 


277 


8/12/07, 9:44 AM 


















278 Concise Textbook of Forensic Medicine and Toxicology 


Non-poisonous snake 
(Belly marks are 
small or do not cover 
completely) 




May be poisonous as 
belly marks cover 
completely 



Poisonous snake (Scales are small) 


May be poisonous (Scales are large) 


Fig. 33.3 Belly and head scales. 



Fig. 33.4 Teeth bite marks. 


Hydrophidae (Sea Snakes) 

These are seen in coastal areas. The eyes are very 
small, and their tails are flattened like fins. They have 
short, immobile fangs. The body is round. Usually, 


sea snakes are not offensive and they rarely bite 
humans. The venom is neurotoxic and myotoxic. As 
a result, there is severe weakness due to muscle 
damage in bites due to sea snakes. 

Snake Venom 

Snake venom is highly concentrated, clear amber 
coloured digestive juice of the snake. When it is 
dried, it becomes like fine needles which are soluble 
in water. It has got proteolytic enzymes, 
phosphatidases, and neurotoxins. Proteolytic 
enzymes cause tissue destruction by liberating 
histamines by damaging muscular epithelium of 
blood vessels leading to release of RBCs and serum 


CFMT-33 (3rd Proof).p65 


278 


8/12/07, 9:44 AM 


































Irritant Poisons—Animal Poisons 279 


Table 33.1 Differences between poisonous and non-poisonous snake 


Features 

Poisonous snake 

Non-poisonous snake 

l. 

Body 

Stout, dull coloured and abruptly 
tapering tail 

Slender body, bright coloured, gradually tapering 
tail 

2. 

Tail 

Flattened or rounded 

Always rounded 

3. 

Belly scales 

Broad 

Small and do not extend across the entire width 

4. 

Head 

Mostly triangular in shape 

Mostly oval or rounded 

5. 

Head scales 

Mostly small 

Mostly large 

6. 

Fangs (Teeth) 

Fangs are present. May be 
grooved or channelised 

Fangs missing. All teeth are small in size 

7. 

Saliva 

Toxic 

Non-toxic 


in tissues. Phosphatidases cause haemolysis and 
toxic effects on heart and circulation. Neurotoxins 
produce curare-like effect on CNS leading to 
paralysis. The snake venom also contains other 
enzymes like proteases, erepsin, choline esterases, 
hyaluronidase, ribonucleases and ophio-oxidases. 

Non-poisonous Snakes 

Majority of the snakes in India are non-poisonous. 
Most of the snakes have their belly covered with 
transverse plates which do not extend completely 
across it. The difference between poisonous and 
non-poisonous snakes are given in Table 33.1. 

Fatal Dose 

The fatal dose for common snake venom is as 
follows: Cobra 12 mg, Russell’s viper 15 mg, Krait 
6 mg, Echis carinatus 8 mg. 

Symptoms of Snake Venom Poisoning 

The clinical features of snake venom poisoning 
depends on many factors like type of snake, age 
and health of the patient, and site of snake bite. 

Local Reaction 

They are present more in viper snake bite. There is 
local swelling due to leakage of fluid as a result of 
damage of capillary endothelium. Pain and 
discolouration develop at the site of the bite. Within 
fifteen minutes nausea, vomiting and signs of 
collapse supervene. There is a cold clammy skin, 


hypersalivation, thready, feeble, rapid pulse with 
low blood pressure is seen. The necrosis develops 
at the site. It develops slowly over the week and is 
mainly ischaemic and present itself as a form of 
dry gangrene. In cases of bite from colubrine snake 
such as cobra or krait, the immediate local actions 
are burning or tingling pain, irritation, swelling and 
inflammation. But the local reaction is very less as 
compared to viper snake bite. Within 15 minutes, 
constitutional symptoms develop in the form of 
giddiness, lethargy, muscular weakness, drowsiness 
and a feeling of intoxication. Nausea and vomiting 
may also be there. Weakness of muscles increases 
and paralysis of limbs develop. It spreads on to 
involve trunk and rest of the body. Breathing 
becomes slow and laboured. The death occurs due 
to coma. 

Snake venom whether it is from cobra or viper 
group of snakes, it has haemolytic action on blood. 
It reduces coagulability of blood leading to oozing 
of blood from the site of the bite. Spontaneous 
oozing of blood into vital organs such as brain can 
occur up to several days after the bite. It is due to 
direct endothelial damage caused by venom 
component. 

Acute renal failure may follow within one 
week. It is due to combination of factors like shock, 
myolysis, direct effect of venom and intravascular 
haemolysis. 

Myotoxic effects are the main features in sea 
snake bite. Generalised muscle pain is seen in all 
skeletal muscles of the body. Pituitary failure in 


CFMT-33 (3rd Proof).p65 


279 


8/12/07, 9:44 AM 





















280 Concise Textbook of Forensic Medicine and Toxicology 


the form of pituitary haemorrhage may be seen in 
Russell’s viper bites. Sweating, cold extremities, 
tachycardia, hypotension and ECG changes (S-T 
changes) are the features of cardiovascular 
depression seen in cobra and viper bites. 
Hyperkalaemia leading to cardiac arrest is seen in 
sea snake poisoning. Hyperkalaemia occurs as a 
result of muscle damage. As snake venom can cross 
placenta, when pregnant women is bitten by snake, 
her foetus can die too due to venom effect. 

Specific Findings in Various Snake Bites 

1. Common Krait: Venom is neurotoxic. Not 
much pain or swelling at local site but within 
1 hour the victim feels sleepy and 
neurotoxicity develops. 

2. Cobra: Swelling at local site develops not 
before 2-3 hours. Necrosis develops more 
rapidly and may be seen as wet gangrene in 
2-3 days. Local symptoms include reddish 
tender spot with burning pain. The 
neurotoxic effects start within 30-60 
minutes. 

3. Sea Snakes: Venom is most toxic as 
compared to cobra and vipers. Snake bite is 
small pin-head puncture usually 1-8 in 
number, without much local pain. Paralysis 
and rhabdomyolysis are seen. Painful 
muscular movement, ascending paralysis, 
slurred speech, dysphagia, ptosis and 
myoglobulinuria are seen. Bulbar 
involvement may lead to respiratory failure. 

4. Russell’s Viper and Echis Carinatus: 
Severe local reaction is followed by swelling 
in 15-20 minutes. Local necrosis appears 
slowly over weeks and present as dry 
gangrene. The death is caused due to shock 
developing within one week. 

Fatal Period 

In case of colubrine snake, death may occur from 
20 minutes to 6 hours while in case of viperidae it 
may take 2-4 days. 


Treatment 

It may be divided into two stages. Lirst is, first aid 
that can be provided at the site only, secondly, 
hospital treatment is provided. 

First Aid 

1. Reassure the patient. It is very important, 
as many people just die because of 
neurogenic shock resulting from fear of 
death. Majority of the snakes are non- 
poisonous. It may be assured to the patient 
that it may be possible that he may have been 
bitten by a non-poisonous snake, if the snake 
is not traceable. Even in poisonous snake 
bite, reassure the patient that he may not 
die and everything is being done. 

2. Wash the site of bite thoroughly with plain 
water or an antiseptic. 

3. Incision and Suction: The application of 
incision and suction is controversial. 
Incision can increase bleeding, damage 
nerves and tendons, delay healing and may 
cause infections. Incision is helpful if it is 
done within 15 minutes of bite. A linear 
incision should be made which is only skin 
deep. The suction should be done preferably 
with a breast pump or mouth. The person 
who does suction by mouth should not have 
ulcers or sores in the mouth or lips. Suction 
can be done up to 1 hour of the bite. 

4. If evacuation to a hospital will take more 
than 30 minutes, then a bandage or ligature 
should be applied above the site of the bite. 
It should not be very tight. It should allow 
two fingers under it. If swelling appears due 
to ligature, apply another one above the first 
before releasing the first one. 

5. During transit, the patient should not be moved 
unnecessarily as it would spread the venom. 

6. If snake has been caught or killed, it should 
also be carried to hospital to identify 
whether it is poisonous or not and belongs 
to which species. 


CFMT-33 (3rd Proof).p65 


280 


8/12/07, 9:44 AM 


















Irritant Poisons—Animal Poisons 281 


Hospital Treatment 

1. The patient should be admitted at once and 
his clinical status should be evaluated. 

2. The ligature applied should be removed. The 
bite site should be cleaned but no dressing 
should be applied. The limb should be 
elevated. 

3. Antivenin should be started immediately 
once the signs of poisoning are noted. 
Antivenin is prepared from horses. Usually, 
it is of two types—monovalent that is 
specific to one snake and polyvalent, which 
is for a group of common snakes. The 
Haffkine Institute prepares polyvalent anti¬ 
snake venom which is quite effective against 
cobra, common krait and Russell’s viper. 
Slowly, 20 ml of polyvalent anti-snake 
venom serum should be injected intra¬ 
venously as early as possible and the dose 
should be repeated after 2 hours. The dose 
may be repeated after every 6 hours till the 
symptoms of poisoning disappear. There is 
no need to do sensitivity test. If there is an 
allergic reaction, it should be managed with 
epinephrine. 

4. The local necrosis should be managed with 
antibiotics, excision of slough and use of 
skin grafting. 

5. Analgesics may be given for relief of pain. 
Blood transfusion is helpful in viper bites. 

6. Use cholinergics to counter neurotoxic 
effects of elapid bites. Neostigmine can be 
given to minimise neurotoxic effects. 

7. Pulse, blood pressure and respiration should 
be monitored. 

8. Abnormal bleeding should be looked for. 

9. Necessary investigations like haemoglobin, 
TLC, DLC, ESR, urine output, blood urea, 
creatinine, SGOT, SGPT, EPK and ECG 
should be done. 

Post-mortem Appearance 

Two lacerated punctures about 1.25 cm deep in case 
of colubrines and about 2.5 cm deep in vipers can 


be seen as a rule. Sometimes, they may be so minute 
that they can be seen only by a lens. Swelling and 
cellulitis may be seen around the part which is 
bitten. Petechial haemorrhages and intense 
congestion is seen in different organs. 

Medico-legal Significance 

Most snake bites are accidental in nature. Cases 
have been reported when snakes have been used 
for homicide by putting the snakes near the victim. 
Suicide by snake bite is rare but reported. 

POISONOUS INSECTS 
Ants 

Ants secrete formic acid from their glands situated 
in the tail and it causes pain, irritation and swelling 
when they bite. The wounds should be thoroughly 
cleaned and antiseptic solution may be applied. If 
needed, analgesics may be given. 

Wasp, Bees and Hornets 

The bee venom contains histamine and melittin, 
hyaluronidase, phospholipase, apamin and peptides. 
The wasp venom contains serotonin, histamine, 
kinin, hyaluronidase and phospholipases. Single 
bite may produce local irritation, burning and 
swelling but when a person is attacked by many 
wasps, the person may go into shock due to 
anaphylactic reaction. Generalised itching, 
urticaria, sense of constriction in the chest, 
tachycardia, cold clammy skin, hypotension and 
finally death may be seen. In treatment, the bite 
should be examined. Sting of the bee should be 
removed if present. Local anti-inflammatory 
ointment should be applied along with analgesics 
given orally or by intramuscular route. In severe 
bites, steroids should be given immediately. If 
needed, endotracheal intubation may be done. The 
anti-inflammatory drugs should be administered 
intravenously. 


CFMT-33 (3rd Proof).p65 


281 


8/12/07, 9:44 AM 


















282 Concise Textbook of Forensic Medicine and Toxicology 


Scorpions 

The scorpions have a hollow sting in the last joint 
of their tail which communicates with a poisonous 
gland through a duct. The poison contains neurotoxin, 
haemolysins, agglutinins, haemorrhagins, phosp¬ 
holipases, lecithins and cholesterin. The neurotoxin 
causes depression of vasomotor centres. 

When scorpion bites, it produces intense 
burning and swelling at the site. It may cause 
giddiness, faintness, muscular weakness, vomiting, 
diarrhoea, convulsions and sometimes death. 

In treatment, apply a ligature above the bite 
and incise it. The wound should be cleaned with 
antiseptic solution. The steroids may be given 


intravenously to manage shock. Anti-inflammatory 
and analgesic drugs should be used. 

INSULIN POISONING 

Many cases have been described where insulin has 
been used to kill the person. The insulin is injected 
as adjunct to some injection or mixed in the 
intravenous fluid if a person is already receiving it. 
The insulin causes hypoglycaemia when given in 
large doses. The symptoms include weakness, 
fatigue, hunger, dizziness, cramps, tachycardia, 
excessive sweating, delirium, shock, dilated pupils, 
hypotension, coma and death. Blood sugar level 
below 50 mg per 100 ml of blood may be found. 


CFMT-33 (3rd Proof).p65 


282 


8/12/07, 9:44 AM 


















CHAPTER 

Irritant Poisons—Mechanical 
Poisons 


Mechanical poisons do not come into the category 
of poisons as they do not produce toxic effect per 
se. They are not absorbed into the body but cause 
mechanical obstruction in gastrointestinal tract. 
They cause irritation, perforation and obstruction 
due to their edges or shatp points. But they are 
included into the list of poisons in the expression 
“Unwholesome drug or other drug” in Section 328 
of the Indian Penal Code. Some common 
mechanical poisons are powdered glass, diamond 
powder, pins, needles, nail, chopped animal and 
vegetable hairs. 

POWDERED GLASS 
Symptoms 

There is sharp and severe burning pain in throat 
and stomach when it is taken in through mouth. 
Nausea and vomiting may follow. The sharp ends 
of glass may cause severe erosion of the 
oesophagus, stomach and intestine leading to severe 
bleeding or perforation. Generally, constipation 
occurs but diarrhoea may also be seen with blood. 

Fatal Dose 

Uncertain. Even large doses are sometimes not fatal. 

Fatal Period 

Uncertain. Death may occur in hours to days. 


Treatment 

Give bulky food like bananas, rice or isabgol. After 
that, purgative may be given. Antacids may be given 
later to soothe gastric or oesophageal mucosa. If 
shatp ends are present, one may have to resort to 
surgery to remove pieces. 

Post-mortem Appearance 

Erosion is widely seen in mouth, pharynx, 
oesophagus, stomach and intestine. Fragments of 
glass are seen adhered to stomach wall. The 
mucosal membranes are congested and inflamed. 

Medico-legal Significance 

It is a general belief that glass is highly poisonous. 
So, it is given for homicidal purposes by mixing it 
in food like rice or vegetables. Powdered glass is 
rarely used for suicidal purposes. It may be used 
for killing cattle. Many artists show eating of glass 
in circuses and public shows. 

DIAMOND POWDER 

It is a common belief that diamond powder is very 
toxic but it is not. Diamond powder causes irritation 
in the gastrointestinal tract due to its sharp and 
prominent edges. The treatment includes giving 
bulky food and then laxatives. Later, antacids may 


CFMT-34 (3rd Proof).p65 


283 


8/12/07, 9:44 AM 




















284 Concise Textbook of Forensic Medicine and Toxicology 


be given to soothe gastric and intestinal mucosa. A 
criminal may swallow diamonds to steal or escape 
from police search. 

NEEDLES AND PINS 

Needles and pins when consumed through oral 
route cause severe burning pain and irritation in 
the oesophagus and stomach. Due to very sharp 
edges it may cause perforation or may be impacted 
in mucosa wall. Death may occur due to 
perforation. Treatment includes giving bulky food 
and then laxatives. But sometimes, surgery may be 
required to remove needles and pins as they are 
impacted in the mucosa wall. X-ray examination 
is quite helpful in locating the exact site of 
impaction. Needles and pins may be accidentally 
ingested while working. Such incidents are 
common in children. Suicides and homicides are 
rare. 

CHOPPED ANIMAL HAIRS 

It is a general belief that chopped animal hairs are 
quite poisonous but it is not true. They cause 
irritation in the stomach and may cause vomiting 


and diarrhoea. Sometimes, they are given to animals 
to kill them but rarely do they cause any harm. At 
times, if they are not excreted out through faeces, 
they may cause intestinal obstruction and digestive 
disorders. Sometimes, chopped animal hairs are 
given in the food to punish someone rather than 
kill him. 

VEGETABLE HAIRS 

These are fine, short hairs derived from leaves and 
stalks of certain plants and called stinging hairs. 
They cause mechanical irritation when they come 
into contact with skin or mucosa. Sometimes, these 
hairs have short bulbs attached to them which 
contain irritant fluid consisting of histamine and 
acetyl choline. The fluids also cause irritation when 
they come in contact with skin. Treatment includes 
washing the area where the juice has come in 
contact with, with water and later anti-septic and 
antiinflammatory lotion may be applied. If these 
vegetable hairs are ingested, bulky food may be 
given followed by laxatives. Cases have been 
reported where these hair have been applied to 
fellow-passengers in train to produce irritation with 
a view to divert attention to rob the person. 


CFMT-34 (3rd Proof).p65 


284 


8/12/07, 9:44 AM 


















Somniferous 


CHAPTER 

35 

Neurotic Poisons 
Poisons 


The neurotic poisons can be sub-divided into 
following categories depending upon their action: 

1. Somniferous poisons 

2. Inebriant poisons 

3. Deliriant poisons. 

Somniferous poisons are those which act on 
the brain producing narcotic analgesia. The most 
important somniferous poison is opium and its 
derivatives. 

OPIUM 

It is commonly called afim. Opium is coagulated 
air dried, latex juice obtained by incision of unripe 
capsules of white poppy, known as Papaver 
somniferum. The family name is Papaveraceae and 
is widely grown all over the world. In India, it grows 
widely and also cultivated under government 
licence. The whole production of poppy is taken 
by the government and is processed by the 
government. Opium factory at Ghazipur, Uttar 
Pradesh, is utilized to obtain morphine. 

Poppy capsules (Post ka doda) when they are 
ripe and dry contain traces of opium. They are used 
for sedative and narcotic effect. The warm 
decoction obtained from them is used as sedative 
fermentation and poultice (Fig. 35.1). 
Poppy seeds (Khas khas) are white in colour and 
do not contain morphine or any sedative and are 


used as food. They are sprinkled over sweets. They 
are considered as demulcent and nutritive. Poppy 
seed oil commonly known as Khas khas ka tel is 
obtained from them and is used for culinary and 
lighting purposes. Opium is irregularly formed, has 
strong characteristic smell and bitter taste. Opium 
contains about 25 alkaloids combined with 
meconic, lactic and sulphuric acid. There are two 
groups of alkaloids present in opium. 

1 . Phenanthrene Group: Motphine, codeine, 
thebaine and their derivatives. 

2. Benzyl Isoquinoline Group: Papaverine 
and narcotine. 

The most important alkaloid is morphine 
followed by codeine, narcotine, papaverine 
and thebaine. 

MORPHINE 

The chemical formula is C 17 H 19 0 3 N. The morphine 
is named after a Greek god, Morpheus, who is 
considered as God of dreams. It occurs as white 
powder or white shining crystals with bitter taste 
and alkaline reaction. Morphine has depressive 
effect on cerebral cortex, respiratory system and 
depresses cough reflex. The vomiting centres and 
vagus are stimulated. Morphine causes stimulation 
of spinal cord. Morphine causes analgesia due to 
depression of pain perception and its euphoric 
effects. 


CFMT-35 (3rd Proof).p65 


285 


8/12/07, 11:44 AM 



















286 Concise Textbook of Forensic Medicine and Toxicology 



Fig. 35.1 Poppy plant with its capsule. 


Heroin 

It is a synthetic derivative of morphine. It is diacetyl 
morphine or diamorphine hydrochloridum. It is 
more analgesic and euphorigenic than morphine. 
It can be smoked or injected. It is marketed by drug 
peddlers as white sugar. It is one of the most 
addictive alkaloids on earth and is banned all over 
the world. A slight variant called brown sugar is 
also available in the market. It contains impure 
variant of heroin and may sometimes contain other 
narcotics like ganja, charas, etc. The brown sugar 
is widely used in poor countries and in India as it 
is quite cheap as compared to pure heroin (white 
sugar). Heroin can also be taken as snuff. 

Heroin is an oxidation product of morphine and 
is colourless, crystalline in nature and soluble in 
alcohol and water. 

Codeine 

The chemical formula of codeine is C 18^21 03 H 
(methyl morphine). It occurs as colourless, 
crystalline form and is soluble in water. Codeine is 
commonly used in clinical practice for suppression 
of cough. Other alkaloids like narcotine, papaverine 
and thebaine are not much important as their 
toxicity is reported to be very less. Papaverine is 


not narcotic in nature but causes relaxation of 
smooth muscles. Thebaine can cause convulsions. 
Narcotine is very less poisonous and can produce 
effect only in large doses. 

Acute Poisoning 

The effects of acute poisoning starts within 30 
minutes of consumption. The effects can be divided 
into three stages: 

1. Stage of Euphoria: This is the first stage 
where chief symptoms are increased sense 
of well being, mental activity, hallucinations 
and freedom from anxiety. This stage lasts 
for a short duration. 

2. Stage of Sopor: The chief symptoms are 
headache, nausea, vomiting, giddiness, 
drowsiness and desire to sleep. The pupils 
are constricted. The face and lip appear 
cyanosed. Itching sensation may be there. 

3. Stage of Narcosis: The person now passes 
into a deeper stage of coma. There is 
muscular relaxation with lost reflexes. The 
person cannot be aroused from deep coma. 
The face is pale and the lips are livid. The 
pupils are constricted to pin points, are 
insensitive to light, and the vision is tubular. 
The blood pressure begins to fall and slowly 
respiration becomes slow and laboured. 
There may be cheyne-stokes breathing and 
finally death may occur due to respiratory 
failure causing asphyxia. 

Unusual Symptoms 

The following unusual symptoms can be seen in 
acute poisoning: 

1. Vomiting and purging. 

2. Convulsions like in tetanus in codeine 
poisoning. 

3. Syncope. 

4. Hypothermia may occur in some persons 
and is caused by muscular hypotonia and 


CFMT-35 (3rd Proof).p65 


286 


8/12/07, 11:44 AM 


















Neurotic Poisons—Somniferous Poisons 287 


peripheral vasodilatation. In such a situation, 
the pupil would be dilated. 

5. Tachycardia, cardiac conduction defects and 
cardiac arrest may be seen. 

6 . Non-cardiogenic pulmonary oedema can be 
seen in poisoning due to heroin, codeine and 
methadone. 

7. Pressure necrosis of muscles can be seen in 
a prolonged deep coma but opium induced 
rhabdomyolysis, not due to pressure, can 
also be seen. Elevated CPK, hypocalcaemia 
and hyperphosphataemia would be seen. 

Differential Diagnosis of Opium Poisoning 

In all cases of suspected opium poisoning, the 
following conditions must be suspected and ruled 
out: 

1. Apoplexy: Usually seen in elderly person. 
History of uncontrolled blood pressure or 
long standing history of hypertension may 
be there. Hemiplegia may be seen. The 
pupils are dilated and blood pressure may 
be high. 

2. Uraemic Coma: Long standing history of 
kidney disease with abnormal renal function 
tests may be seen. Urine may show albumin. 

3. Diabetic Coma: History of diabetes 
mellitus may be there. Intraocular tension 
is low. The pupils would be dilated. High 
blood sugar can be demonstrated. 

4. Epileptic Coma: History of epileptic fit 
may be there. The pupils are dilated. Coma 
is less as compared to opium poisoning. 

5. Hysterical Coma: Usually seen in females 
especially young. Some sort of mental 
problem may be there in the family. 
Respond well to ammonia. Tongue is not 
bitten. Convulsive movements may be seen. 
Pupils are normal. 

6 . Acute Alcohol Poisoning: Smell of alcohol 
present in breath and pupils are dilated. 

7. Carbolic Acid Poisoning: Characteristic 
odour in breath, white patches on mouth. 


green coloured urine and normal pupils are 
the main features. 

8 . Barbiturate Poisoning: Pupils are dilated 
with high respiratory rate. 

9. Head Injury: The presence of injuries on 
head like abrasion, contusion, laceration or 
fracture of skull bones may be seen. 
Bleeding from nose or ears may be seen. 

Fatal Dose 

Approximately 1-2 gm is fatal in young adults. 

Children require about 0.5-1 gm as fatal dose. 

Fatal Period 

The average fatal period is 8-12 hours. 

Treatment 

Opium poisoning can be treated in following ways: 

1 . Gastric Lavage: It should immediately be 
done first with warm water. Sample of 
gastric lavage must be preserved. Later, the 
stomach wash can be done with a solution 
of potassium permanganate which converts 
opium and its alkaloids into harmless 
compound by oxidation. It converts 
morphine into oxydimorphine. Even in 
cases where morphine is given by any route 
other than oral, gastric lavage should be 
done as morphine is re-excreted into 
stomach. 

2. Airways: They should be secured. If 
needed, endotracheal intubation should be 
done. Oxygen should be started. 

3. Antidote: Once it is confirmed that the 
person has taken opiates, naloxone in dose 
of 0.4-1.2 mg should be given intravenously 
at once. The person should be observed for 
next three minutes. If there is a change in 
size of pupils, respiratory rate and level of 
consciousness, it is a positive sign. If a 
positive response does not occur, 1.2-2.0 
mg of naloxone should be given every 3-5 


CFMT-35 (3rd Proof).p65 


287 


8/12/07, 11:44 AM 


















288 Concise Textbook of Forensic Medicine and Toxicology 


minutes till a response occurs or the dose 
reaches about 4-10 mg. The naloxone has 
a half-life of 1 hour, so it has to be given 
continuously. If required, intravenous 
infusion can be given. 

Pethidine hydrochloride and methadone are 
morphine-like compounds and require same 
treatment. 

4. Body Heat: The body heat should be 
maintained by warm blankets. Hypotension 
should be treated with fluids. The patient 
should be monitored for late deterioration. 

Post-mortem Findings 

The post-mortem findings are not very specific but 
signs of asphyxial death are present. The smell of 
opium can be appreciated when body cavities are 
opened. The organs are congested. 


Medico-legal Significance 

Opium is one of the commonest drugs of abuse. A 
large number of people are addicted to opium in 
different ways. The most common is heroin which 
is widely used all over the world and is taken either 
by injection or snuffed by putting it on cigarette 
foil and heating it from below. In villages, many 
people consume opium. Opium is also widely used 
for committing suicide. Many medical and para 
medical professionals have committed suicide by 
injecting morphine along with skeletal muscle 
relaxants. Opium is also used as a cattle poison. 
Small children are sometimes killed by drugging 
them with opium. Since opium is eliminated in 
urine and faeces, samples of urine and faeces can 
be preserved in cases where stomachwash has not 
given positive tests. 


CFMT-35 (3rd Proof).p65 


288 


8/12/07, 11:44 AM 


















CHAPTER 

Cerebral Poisons—Inebriant 
Poisons 


ALCOHOL (ETHYL ALCOHOL) 

The chemical formula is C 2 H 5 OH. It is one of the 
most common inebriant poisons used all over the 
world, mostly as a social drink. It is colourless, 
transparent, volatile liquid, having a characteristic 
smell and a burning taste. It is very commonly used 
as a solvent for fats, resins, volatile oils, etc. It is 
also commonly used as base in liquid medicines. In 
cough syrups, it is found in very high concentration. 
Some ayurvedic medicines contain very high 
concentration of alcohol and are commonly abused. 

In alcoholic drinks, the percentage of alcohol 
is very high. Table 36.1 shows concentration of 
alcohol in common alcoholic beverages. 

Absolute alcohol contains about 99.95 percent 
alcohol. Rectified spirit contains about 90 per cent 


Table 36.1 Concentration of alcohol in common alcoholic 
beverages 


Brand 

Percentage of alcohol 

1. Whisky 

40 

2. Rum 

40-60 

3. Gin 

40 

4. Brandy 

40-50 

5. Light lager beer 

3-4 

6. Strong beers 

8-10 

7. Wine 

20 

8. Champagne 

10-30 

9. Vodka 

40-60 


while industrial methylated spirit or denatured 
alcohol contains 95 per cent alcohol and 5 per cent 
wood naphtha. Rectified spirit used in clinical 
practice contains minor quantity of copper sulphate, 
which is added to make it unfit for ingestion. 

Acute Poisoning 

It results from consumption of alcoholic beverages 
in large doses or small doses over a period of time. 
The following clinical features are noticed: 

Clinical Symptoms 

Stage I: The first symptoms are sense of 
well-being, self-confidence and exhilaration. 
Alcohol in small doses cause inhibition of social 
inhibitions. The person becomes talkative. The face 
becomes flushed. He may become argumentative, 
show carefree behaviour, become sentimental or 
sad or depressed. Gradual loss of self-control is 
seen. These symptoms are seen when concentration 
of alcohol in blood is about 80-100 mg per 100 ml 
of blood. The breath smells of alcohol. 

Stage II: If alcohol concentration rises 
further, there is a stage of confusion, perception 
becomes dull and there is muscular incoordination. 
The gait becomes staggering. The voice becomes 
slurred and speech is incoherent. The vision 
becomes blurred and stupor follows. There may be 


CFMT-36 (3rd Proof).p65 


289 


8/12/07, 9:45 AM 






















290 Concise Textbook of Forensic Medicine and Toxicology 


severe nausea and vomiting which may relieve the 
poisoning. These symptoms are seen in blood 
concentration 100-200 mg per 100 ml of blood. 
The breath smells of alcohol. 

Stage III: If alcohol concentration goes 
beyond 180-200 mg, the person starts having 
severe sleep, severe headache and gradually passes 
into a stage of unconsciousness and finally into deep 
coma leading to death. There may be full rapid pulse 
with stertorous breathing. Pulse gradually becomes 
slow and finally stops. The pupils are dilated in the 
early stage but may be constricted in late stages or 
in coma. The breath smells of alcohol. Positional 
nystagmus is seen which changes its direction 
according to the change in the position of head. 
When the jerking movement is in the direction of 
gaze irrespective of the position of head, it is called 
‘alcohol gaze nystagmus’. On stimulation of the 
subject by pinching on face or neck, pupils dilate 
initially and slowly return to their original size. This 
is known as MacEwen’s Sign. The body 
temperature falls. Death may be due to asphyxia 
as a result of respiratory failure as alcohol depresses 
vasomotor centres. Convulsion may precede death. 
Death may occur if blood alcohol level goes above 
250-300 mg per 100 ml of blood. Alcohol levels 
above 300 mg per 100 ml of blood are fatal. 

Fatal Dose 

It depends on age, sex and health of the individual 
while chronic users can tolerate high doses. If 
alcohol is consumed faster, less dose is required. 
About 150-250 ml of absolute alcohol may be an 
average fatal dose for an adult. The consumption 
of full bottle (750 ml) of whisky can cause death. 

Fatal Period 

Usually it is 12-24 hours. 

Treatment 

If a patient is brought in early stages, gastric lavage 
is of much use. It should be done with sodium 


bicarbonate. If the patient comes late, gastric lavage 
is not indicated as it removes only a small amount 
of alcohol from the alimentary canal. If the victim 
is unconscious, gastric lavage should be done only 
after protecting the airway by endotracheal tube. 
Treatment is mainly supportive as the patient will 
improve slowly. Alcohol poisoning should be 
differentiated from barbiturate poisoning, head 
injury, cardiovascular accidents and hypoglycaemia. 
CT scan of head should be done if needed. 
Intravenous fluids should not be given in large doses. 
Hemodialysis may be done in severe cases. Vitamin 
B should be given to all patients where glucose is 
administered. Recovery occurs in due course of time 
if complications do not set in. 

Post-mortem Appearance 

The findings are suggestive of asphyxial death. The 
rigor mortis may be delayed. Decomposition may 
be retarded in some cases. The alcoholic smell can 
be appreciated well when body cavities are opened. 
The mucosa of stomach and intestine may be found 
to be congested. The liver, lungs and brain are 
congested. The blood is dark and fluid. The viscera 
should be preserved in saturated solution of 
common salt. 

Chronic Poisoning 

Chronic alcohol poisoning is rampant all over the 
world. Alcohol is consumed by habitual drinkers 
for a very long time. Addiction to alcohol may be 
due to mental stress, unemployment, failure in love, 
loss of self-esteem, poverty, marital disharmony, 
etc. Chronic alcohol addiction is commonly seen 
in lower socioeconomic strata and it causes 
abnormal physical and mental behaviour. The 
addict may steal things to get money for drinking. 
He may become quarrelsome and hence beat wife 
and children. He may resort to criminal behaviour 
and may commit homicide or suicide. 

The patient suffering from chronic addiction 
to alcohol suffers from loss of appetite, nausea, 
vomiting, especially in the morning, and diarrhoea. 


CFMT-36 (3rd Proof).p65 


290 


8/12/07, 9:45 AM 


















Cerebral Poisons—Inebriant Poisons 291 


Due to chronic damage to liver, jaundice may be 
seen. Tremors of tongue and hands may be seen. 
Loss of memory, insomnia, impaired power of 
judgement, confusion and abnormal mental 
behaviour are seen. Features of malnutrition and 
chronic vitamin deficiencies are seen. Chronic 
alcoholic myopathy and neuropathies are seen later 
in addiction. Dementia may be seen in later stages. 
The following common complications are observed: 

1. Alimentary Canal: Gastritis, increased 
incidence of peptic ulcer and carcinoma. 

2. Liver: Fatty liver, cirrhosis, portal 
hypertension and hepatitis. 

3. Pancreas: Acute or chronic pancreatitis. 

4. Cardiovascular System: Cardiomyopathy, 
hypertension and arrhythmias. 

5. Central Nervous System: Polyneuropathy, 
cerebellar degeneration, demyelination of 
corpus callosum and amblyopia, stroke. 

6 . Respiratory System : Aspiration pneumonia. 

7. Endocrine System: Flypogonadism and 
feminisation in males, impotence, 
menorrhagia and amenorrhoea. 

8. Blood: Hypochromic anaemia and throm¬ 
bocytopenia. 

9. Skeletal Muscle: Myopathy. 

1 0. Neuropsychiatric Complications: Loss of 
memory, delusions, delirium tremens, 
Wernicke’s encephalopathy, Korsakoff’s 
psychosis, dementia and hallucinations. 

Once a person who is addicted to alcohol does 
not take alcohol for a period of time, he gets 
withdrawal reaction which is described as follows: 

1. The person starts getting tremors, 
commonly called shakes of hands, legs and 
trunk, sweating, headache, insomnia and 
person becomes very agitated and demands 
alcohol. These are usually seen in 8-10 
hours of cessation of alcohol. 

2. The person starts having hallucinations and 
seizures commonly called ‘rum tits’. Tonic- 
clonic convulsions may be seen. These 
develop within 40 hours. 


3. Alcoholic ketoacidosis may be seen in 1-3 
days. The person may have drowsiness, 
confusion, tachycardia and difficulty in 
breathing. Ketone bodies can be demons¬ 
trated in blood and urine. Hypokalaemia 
may be seen. 

4. Delirium Tremens: It may be seen in 4-5 
days. In this, there is loss of recent memory, 
clouding of consciousness and 
disorientation. Hallucinations are there. 
They may be visual or auditory in nature. 

The person is highly agitated, restless 
and may shout a lot. Tremors are seen with 
truncal ataxia. Sweating, tachycardia, 
dilated pupils, dehydration and impaired 
liver functions may be seen. Disorientation 
of time and place is seen. 

5. Wernicke-Korsakoff syndrome: It is very 
rare. It occurs due to thiamine deficiency 
which in turn results from improper diet 
taken by the addict due to chronic alcoholic 
addiction. In acute form, drowsiness, 
disorientation, ataxia, amnesia and 
peripheral neuropathy are seen. Horizontal 
nystagmus and external ocular palsies may 
be seen. If a person recovers from the acute 
stage he may land into the chronic form 
called Korsakoff psychosis characterised by 
impairment of memory and confabulation. 

Treatment of Chronic Alcoholic Addiction 

The most important aspect in the treatment is to 
educate and motivate the addict to leave alcohol. 
Psychological aspect has to be taken care of very 
well. The counsellor should spend time in dealing 
with emotional crisis of the addict. The medical 
treatment consists of: 

1 . Treatment of Withdrawal Systems: The 

withdrawal symptoms should be treated 
with carbamazepine which is quite effective 
even in delirium tremens. Chlormethiazole 
is also used for treatment of withdrawal 
symptoms. The drugs are given for a period 


CFMT-36 (3rd Proof).p65 


291 


8/12/07, 9:45 AM 


















292 Concise Textbook of Forensic Medicine and Toxicology 


of 1-2 weeks and are withdrawn slowly by 
reducing doses. Some clinicians have 
reported good results with clonidine. 

2. Antabuse Therapy: Once the patient is 
stabilised after taking care of withdrawal 
reaction, Antabuse therapy can be started. 
The purpose of Antabuse therapy is to 
detoxify the individual. The insatiable desire 
to drink alcohol can be treated with 
Antabuse. The common drug used is 
disulfiram (tetra-ethylthiuram disulphide). 
The Antabuse interferes with oxidative 
metabolism of ethanol at acetaldehyde level. 
As a result of which, if alcohol is consumed 
with Antabuse therapy on, there is 
accumulation of acetaldehyde which causes 
unpleasant symptoms. So, once the patient 
is on disulfiram therapy he avoids taking 
alcohol to avoid unpleasant symptoms like 
flushing, palpitation, throbbing headache, 
nausea and vomiting, sweating, chest pain, 
hypotension and vertigo. The usual dose of 
disulfiram is 250 mg/day for a long time. 

There are other drugs also which produce 
Antabuse-like reaction with ethanol, but they 
are rarely used for detoxification. Such drugs 
include cephalosporins, chloramphenicol, 
metronidazole, furazoladine, griseo-fulvin, 
glipizide, chlorpropamide and MAO 
inhibitors. Some chemicals like calcium 
cyanamide, carbon disulphide, tetraethyl lead 
and hydrogen sulphide also produce 
Antabuse reaction. Some mushrooms and 
activated charcoal may also give Antabuse 
reaction with alcohol. 

3. Supportive Psychotherapy: This is the 
corner stone of deaddiction, as the patient 
may pick up the habit of drinking alcohol 
again once he leaves the hospital. Support 
from family members, office colleagues and 
friends may be sought. The patient should 
be called to hospital for psychotherapy 
regularly. Alcoholics Anonymous is the 
most famous international organisation 


working in this regard and the patient may 
be asked to join the local branch of this 
organisation. A well balanced diet with 
vitamins should be given. 

Post-mortem Appearance 

The gastric mucosa may show signs of gastritis. 
The liver is congested. Cirrhotic changes may be 
seen. Fatty changes in liver and heart are present. 
Cardiomyopathy may be seen. General features of 
malnutrition may be seen. The odour of alcohol 
can be appreciated in body cavities. 

Pharmacokinetics of Alcohol 

Once ingested, alcohol initially stimulates 
production of hydrochloric acid in the strength of 
5-10 per cent. But if it is above 15 per cent, it causes 
gastritis. Once alcohol is taken, it is mostly 
absorbed through small intestine and only less than 
20 per cent is absorbed through stomach. The 
absorption of alcohol in the body depends on many 
factors. If taken empty stomach, it is absorbed more 
easily. If fatty food is taken its absorption is delayed. 
Milk delays absorption of alcohol. In 30 minutes 
to 2 hours, the maximum concentration of alcohol 
is seen in blood. The alcohol starts being excreted 
in urine. The concentration of alcohol in urine is 
1.3 times higher than that of blood and is fairly 
constant. Once alcohol is in blood, it reaches all 
the fluids and tissues of the body. About 90 per 
cent alcohol is metabolised in liver by enzyme 
alcohol dehydrogenase at a rate of about 10-15 ml 
per hour. Some alcohol is converted into lipids and 
fats in the tissues. Rest of the alcohol is excreted 
through urine, lungs and sweat glands. The 
concentration of alcohol in breath can be measured. 
About 2100 ml of exhaled air contains the same 
amount of alcohol as in one ml of blood. Alcohol 
is a depressant of central nervous system. Only in 
small doses it causes euphoria and elation. 
Impairment of vision develops around 20-30 mg 
per 100 ml of blood. Alcohol also raises auditory 
threshold and reaction time. When applied to skin, 


CFMT-36 (3rd Proof).p65 


292 


8/12/07, 9:45 AM 


















Cerebral Poisons—Inebriant Poisons 293 


alcohol causes cooling and later redness and 
irritation. Alcohol has the power to dehydrate 
tissues by abstracting water. Dehydration ensues 
after drinking alcohol due to diuretic action. 

Medico-legal Significance 

Alcohol is consumed all over the world except in 
Islamic countries, on social events and gathering. 
People also take it alone or in company of friends 
and colleagues. Consumption of alcohol may bring 
a person into conflict with law. 

Drunkenness 

A doctor is called upon by police to examine a 
person who has consumed alcohol. He may be 
brought with following queries: 

1. Whether a person has consumed alcohol or 
not? 

2. Whether he is under the influence of alcohol 
or not. 

The special Committee of British Medical 
Association, 1927 has described drunkenness as “An 
individual can be certified to be drunk only when 
there is evidence that he was so much under the 
influence of alcohol as to have lost control of his 
faculties to such an extent as to render him unable 
to execute safely the occupation in which he was 
engaged at that material time.” 

In India, consumption of alcohol is not an 
offence. The Indian law comes into picture only 
when an individual does drunken behaviour after 
consumption. The law takes cognisance when 
individual behaves in such a manner as to become 
public nuisance, or poses a threat, or actually 
commits an act endangering the life or property of 
another person (or even his own). Such persons are 
arrested by police and brought before a medical 
practitioner for clinical examination. 

The medical examination of the person brought 
for medical examination should be carried out on 
following lines: 


1. Record date and time of examination. Note 
down names of constables who brought 
person for examination. 

2. Name, age, sex, residential address and brief 
history should be taken. Ask about any 
illness or disability. 

3. Consent: Consent should be taken after 
informing him. If the person refuses to give 
informed consent and he is under custody 
of police, examination can be done without 
consent also and samples can also be 
collected. 

4. Two identification marks should be noted. 
Thumb impression should be taken. 

5. State of clothing should be seen. It may be 
soiled by vomiting or incontinence. The 
character of speech should be noted whether 
thick, slurred or over precise. Orientation 
to time, place and person should be 
recorded. The character of handwriting 
should be seen. 

6. Look for tachycardia, whether skin is dry, 
moist or flushed. 

7. Breath: Smell of alcohol should be looked 
for. 

8. Eyes: Appearance of conj unctiva to be noted 
whether congested or not. Reaction of pupils 
to light, size of pupils whether dilated or 
pin-point, are to be noted. Condition of 
extrinsic muscles regarding convergence 
should be noted. Strabismus and nystagmus 
should be looked for. 

9. Ears: Hearing may be impaired. 

10. Gait: Ask the person to walk across the 
room in a straight line. See for lurching or 
reeling and ability to stand with both eyes 
open and closed. 

11. Muscular co-ordination: Ask the person to 
put index finger on nose (Finger nose test). 
See whether he can do it easily or not. Ask 
him to perform small functions like picking 
a coin from the floor, buttoning or 
unbuttoning clothes. See how he performs 
then. 


CFMT-36 (3rd Proof).p65 


293 


8/12/07, 9:45 AM 


















294 Concise Textbook of Forensic Medicine and Toxicology 


12. Reflex: See knee and ankle reflex. Whether 
they are normal or depressed. 

13. Do a complete physical examination. Urine 
sample and blood sample should be 
collected for laboratory investigation. The 
preservative for blood sample should be 
sodium fluoride and for urine sample should 
be phenyl mercuric nitrate. 

14. Opinion: This should be expressed as 
follows: 

(a) The individual examined has or has not 
consumed any alcohol. 

(b) The individual examined has consumed 
alcohol and he is/is not under the 
influence of alcohol. 

(c) The individual is under the influence of 
alcohol but he is/is not a public nuisance 
if kept at large. 

The report should be finally signed by 
the doctor and handed over to police 
along with the sample of blood and urine. 

Widmark Formulae 

The amount of alcohol consumed by a person can 
be found out by the following formula: 

a = c x p x r 

where ‘a’ is amount of alcohol consumed by a 
person in grams, ‘c’ is the amount of alcohol in 
grams per kg estimated in blood, ‘p’ is the weight 
of the person in kg while ‘r’ is a constant value 
which is obtained by dividing the average 
concentration of alcohol in body by the 
concentration of alcohol in the body. This is a 
constant and its value for men is 0.085 and for 
women it is 0.055. 

Alcohol and Sex 

It is widely wrongly presumed that alcohol 
increases the sex desire but its not true. In low doses, 
the person may feel high desire as it causes 
inhibition of social pressure and euphoria but if 
alcohol is taken in large doses, it depresses the sex 


desire. A well known saying summarises it as 
“alcohol provocates the provocation but takes away 
performance.” 

Alcohol and Accidents 

It has been worldwide reported that there is 
increased incidence of road traffic accidents if a 
person drives under the influence of alcohol. It puts 
him and others in grave threat of accidents. In India, 
it is an offence to drive while alcohol is taken vide 
Section 185 of Motor Vehicle Act in which a person 
can be fined and may undergo imprisonment 
ranging from 6 months to 2 years. Many countries 
have set different blood alcohol concentration levels 
for allowing people to drive while under 
intoxication of alcohol. The limit is 20 mg per cent 
in Poland and Sweden, 50 mg per cent in Finland, 
Norway and Netherlands, 80 mg per cent in 
Denmark, Germany, UK, France, and Switzerland, 
100 mg per cent in Ireland and 80 to 150 mg per 
cent in different states of USA. In India, the 
statutory limit is fixed at 30 mg per cent. But since 
breath analysing facilities are not available all over 
India, the drivers are being convicted only on the 
basis of medical examination. 

Breath Analysers 

These are instrument in which a person who is 
accused of driving under the influence of alcohol 
is asked to exhale the air from lungs by the police. 
Previously, the person was asked to blow into a 
plastic balloon which contained a solution of 
dichromate-sulphuric acid which would turn into 
green colour if alcohol concentration was more than 
certain level. Now we have sophisticated breath 
analysers which can sense alcohol levels with a 
very minute exhaled air and even in unconscious 
drivers by keeping them near their nose. The 
breath analyser directly gives the reading in blood 
alcohol concentration. It is based on the formula 
that 2100 ml of respired air contains the same 
amount of alcohol as present in one ml of blood. 


CFMT-36 (3rd Proof).p65 


294 


8/12/07, 9:45 AM 


















Cerebral Poisons—Inebriant Poisons 295 


METHYL ALCOHOL 

The common names are wood spirit, wood naphtha 
and colonial spirit. It is clear, colourless volatile 
liquid with characteristic odour. It has a bitter taste. 
It is used as solvent in shellac and varnish 
manufacture and as an anti-freeze. It is also mixed 
with rectified spirit to make industrial methylated 
spirit which is used in arts, and manufactured as 
denatured spirit. It is also a part of embalming fluid, 
windshield washing fluid and leather dyes. 

Symptoms 

They usually develop within 1 hour of ingestion. 
Usual symptoms are dizziness, weakness, 
headache, vertigo, nausea, vomiting, abdominal 
pain and fixed and dilated pupils. Visual 
disturbances like photophobia and blurred vision 
are seen. The concentric diminution of visual fields 
for colour and form is seen followed by partial or 
total blindness due to retrobulbar neuritis,which in 
turn, is due to the toxic effects of formaldehyde on 
retinal cells. The formaldehyde is formed as a result 
of metabolism of methyl alcohol. On fundus 
examination, hyperemia of optic disc is seen 
followed by retinal oedema leading to optic atrophy 
and blindness. Severe metabolic acidosis follows. 
Tachycardia, hypotension and hypothermia are also 
seen. Death is due to respiratory failure. 

Mechanism of Action 

The methyl alcohol is metabolised in liver by 
alcohol dehydrogenase to formaldehyde, which is 
further metabolised to formic acid. It causes ocular 
toxicity and metabolic acidosis. 

Fatal Dose 

The usual fatal dose is 70-100 ml. 

Fatal Period 

The usual fatal period is 24-36 hours. 


Treatment 

Immediately gastric lavage should be done with 
5 per cent sodium bicarbonate in warm water. 
500 ml solution should be retained in the stomach 
at the end of lavage. 

Antidote 

Ethyl alcohol is the best specific antidote as it 
competes for the same alcoholic dehydrogenase 
enzyme for which methyl alcohol does. It prevents 
metabolism of methyl alcohol, which is then passed 
as such in urine. 10 per cent ethyl alcohol is 
administered intravenously in a dose of 10 ml/kg 
slowly over a time period of 30 minutes. It is 
maintained at rate of infusion 1.5 ml/kg/hour to 
maintain blood level of 100 mg per 100 ml of blood. 
The ethyl alcohol can be given orally also mixed in 
a fruit juice. The usual oral dose is 1 ml/kg of 95 per 
cent ethyl alcohol in 30 minutes which can be 
maintained at 0.25 ml/kg/hour. 

Nowadays, some scientists are using 4- methyl 
pyrazole or fomepizole as antidote. It is a direct 
inhibitor of alcohol dehydrogenase and does not 
cause CNS depression. Sodium bicarbonate should 
also be given intravenously to combat metabolic 
acidosis. Hemodialysis is quite effective in 
removing methanol and its metabolites. Folinic acid 
may be given intravenously as it hastens the 
elimination of formic acid. 

Post-mortem Appearance 

The mucous membranes of stomach and intestine 
are congested. The lungs are congested, and 
oedematous. The pungent smell of methyl alcohol 
can be appreciated. Eyes may show retinal oedema. 
Cyanosis is quite prominent. 

Medico-legal Significance 

Mass poisoning of methyl alcohol is quite common 
in India. Methyl alcohol adulterated intoxicating 
beverages are sometimes sold to poor people who 


CFMT-36 (3rd Proof).p65 


295 


8/12/07, 9:45 AM 


















296 Concise Textbook of Forensic Medicine and Toxicology 


cannot afford country liquor or Indian made foreign 
liquor. As a result of which mass tragedies occur. 
These are called Hooch tragedies. Sometimes, 
there is adulteration of country liquor with methyl 
alcohol and may cause mass deaths. These deaths 
keep on being reported in all leading newspapers 
every year. Sometimes, an alcoholic may consume 
methyl alcohol if he is not able to get ethyl alcohol. 

CHLORAL HYDRATE 

Chloral hydrate was previously used as a hypnotic. 
Nowadays, it is not used in clinical practice. It is 
sometimes used as adulterant in illicit liquor to 
enhance its intoxicating effect. It is commonly 
known as ‘Mickey Finn or Knock out drops’. 

Physical Features 

It is colourless, crystalline, having a pungent banana 
smell, and a bitter taste. It is easily soluble in water 
and alcohol. 

Symptoms 

The common symptoms are nausea, vomiting, 
gastric irritation followed by hypotension, 
drowsiness, unconsciousness, loss of reflex and 
deep coma leading to death. 

Metabolism 

Chloral hydrate is well absorbed through stomach 
and intestine and is metabolised to trichloroethanol 
in liver by enzyme alcohol dehydrogenase. It is 
excreted in urine as urochloralic acid. 

Treatment 

Gastric lavage should be done immediately. Cardiac 
arrhythmias should be managed. The patient should 
be managed on conservative lines. 

Medico-legal Significance 

Accidental poisoning was common previously, 
when chloral hydrate was used as a hypnotic 


medicine, due to overdose. Suicidal cases have been 
reported. Chloral hydrate has been used to stupefy 
the victims to facilitate commission of rape or 
robbery. It can easily be given in beer or whisky. 
Some people put it in their alcoholic drinks to 
increase intoxication. Homicide is rarely reported 
by chloral hydrate. 

BARBITURATES 

The barbiturates are widely used in clinical practice. 
They are commonly classified according to their 
duration of action. The classification is as follows: 

1 . Ultrashort Acting: Duration is less than 
15-20 minutes. The common examples are 
thiopentone and methohexitone. 

2. Short Acting: Duration is less than 3 hours. 
The common examples are hexabarbitone, 
pentabarbitone and secobarbitone. 

3. Intermediate Acting: Duration is 3-6 
hours. The common examples are 
amobarbitone, aprobarbitone and 
butobarbitone. 

4. Long Acting: The duration is 6-12 hours. 
The common examples are mephobarbitone 
and phenobarbitone. 

Chemically, barbiturates are derivatives of 
barbituric acid (2,4,6-trioxohexa hydropyrimidine). 
Clinically they are used as sedative-hypnotic in sleep 
disorders. Ultrashort-acting barbiturates are a part 
of anaesthetic medications, and used everyday in 
operation theatres. Barbiturates, especially long- 
acting once, are used in treatment of epilepsy and 
other convulsant disorders. 

Pharmacokinetics 

After absorption either through oral route or 
intravenous route, they are distributed widely in 
tissues. Metabolism occurs in liver by oxidation 
resulting in formation of alcohols, ketones, phenols 
and carboxylic acid. These are excreted in urine as 
such or in the form of glucuronic acid conjugates. 
Some percentage of long-acting barbiturates like 
phenobarbitone is excreted in the urine as such. 


CFMT-36 (3rd Proof).p65 


296 


8/12/07, 9:45 AM 


















Cerebral Poisons—Inebriant Poisons 297 


Clinical Features 

There are five stages in barbiturate poisoning as 
described by Sunshine and Hackett: 

1. Awake, competent and normally sedated. 

2. Sedated, reflex present, prefers sleep, 
answer questions when aroused, does not 
cerebrate properly. 

3. Comatose and reflexes present. 

4. Comatose and areflexia. 

5. Comatose with respiratory and circulatory 
difficulty. Death occurs from respiratory 
failure. 

The symptoms of barbiturate poisoning depend 
on many factors — 

1. Dose—higher the dose, severe are the 
symptoms. 

2. Short acting barbiturates are more toxic than 
others. 

In fatal poisoning, blood level of 3 mg per 100 
ml of blood is seen in cases of short acting barbiturates 
while it is 10 mg per 100 ml of blood in cases of long 
acting barbiturates. 

If barbiturates are taken with alcohol, the effects 
are more due to synergism. Similar effects are seen 
with antihistamines. If recovery follows, residual 
depression may be seen. Paradoxical excitement is 
seen especially in elderly people. Hypersensitivity 
reaction in the form of localised swelling of eyelids, 
cheek or lip may be seen. 

CHRONIC POISONING 

It is sometimes seen in persons who are on 
medication. Over the time, therapeutic dose keeps 
on increasing to the level that person may get relief 
with 5-6 times the normal dose. The chronic addicts 
show poor judgement, loss of memory, skin 
eruption (cutaneous bullae), constipation, 
irritability, ataxic gait, stammering, cramps and 
orthostatic hypotension. Withdrawal symptoms are 
seen when the drug is withdrawn. 

Fatal Dose 

For phenobarbitone it is 6-10 gm while in cases of 


amobarbitone, pentobarbitone and secobarbitone 
it is 2-3 gm. 

Diagnosis 

Barbiturates can easily be detected by thin layer 
chromatography by using samples of either urine 
or stomach contents. Gas chromatography is also 
very useful. 

Treatment 

The treatment of barbiturate poisoning is 
conservative and involves supporting of respiration 
and circulation. The control of hypothermia is a must. 
Treatment can be done in following ways: 

1. Gastric lavage: It should be done within 4 
hours of ingestion and may be attempted 
even up to 8 hours of ingestion, as 
sometimes ingested drug may form a mass 
resulting in delayed absorption and 
prolonged toxicity. 

2. Repeated dose of activated charcoal is very 
effective. 

3. Doxapram should be infused in severe 
poisoning with respiratory depression. 

4. Forced alkaline dieresis: It is very useful 
only in long-acting barbiturates but not in 
short- and intermediate-acting barbiturates 
as they have high lipid portion coefficients, 
high protein binding and high dissociation 
constants. 

5. Peritoneal dialysis is quite useful. 

6. Hemodialysis is nine times more effective 
in long-acting barbiturates and six times 
more effective in short-acting barbiturates, 
as compared to forced alkaline diuresis. 
Haemoperfusion is also effective. 
Hemodialysis should be done in all cases 
of severe poisoning. 

7. Some scientists have advocated the use of 
CNS stimulants like begemide and 
megimide, but their role is controversial and 
they are not used in clinical practice. 


CFMT-36 (3rd Proof).p65 


297 


8/12/07, 9:45 AM 


















298 Concise Textbook of Forensic Medicine and Toxicology 


Post-mortem Appearance 

Peripheral cyanosis may be seen along with 
barbiturate blisters on dependent parts of body. 
Froth may be seen at mouth and nose. Erosion or 
congestion may be seen in stomach and intestine. 
Lungs are intensely congested. 

Medico-legal Points 

Incidence of barbiturate poisoning has gone down 
as its use is now limited. Various cases are reported 
where doctors or paramedical workers have 
committed suicide by using short-acting barbiturates 
along with muscle relaxants. Thiopental is used as 
truth serum to extract confession or secrets during 
interrogation by inducing a state of hypnosis. The 
person may tell the truth or reveal crucial links to 
help investigation. This technique is called 
Narcoanalysis and is now allowed by courts in India 
to investigate hardened criminals. 

Accidental poisoning is common in persons 
using barbiturates as medicines because of 
tolerance. Automatism is reported in chronic 
barbiturate use as the person may keep on taking 
medicine by thinking that he has not taken 
medicine. Homicidal poisoning is also reported. 

BENZODIAZEPINES 

The benzodiazepines are commonly used for the 
treatment of anxiety, insomnia and in treatment of 
convulsions, movement disorders and mania along 
with others dmgs. The common benzodiazepines used 
are alprazolam, chlorodiazepoxide, clonazepam, 
lorazepam, etc. 

Acute Poisoning 

The benzodiazepines are one of the most safe drugs. 
Deaths have not been reported even when large doses 
are taken. The mild features include drowsiness, 
weakness and ataxia. In moderate to severe 
poisoning, vertigo, slurred speech, lethargy, 
nystagmus and coma may be seen. The 


benzodiazepines act by lowering the potential 
difference between the interior and exterior of cell, 
causing inability of the cell to conduct nerve impulse. 

Treatment 

It involves the following meassures: 

1. Gastric Lavage: It should be done within 
6-12 hours of ingestion. Activated charcoal 
may be given. 

2. Supportive Therapy: It is the mainstay of 
treatment. Secure airways. Maintain 
circulation. 

3. Flumazenil Therapy: Benzodiazepine 
antagonist flumazenil rapidly reverses the 
action of benzodiazepines. There is a 
dramatic improvement in anxiolytic, ataxic, 
anaesthetic and muscle relaxants effects of 
benzodiazepines. But duration of action is 
short lived (30 minutes to 1 hour). Repeated 
doses may be given to prolong effect. The 
recommended dose is 0.1 mg/minute in slow 
infusion to a total dose of 1 mg. The dose 
may be repeated after 1-2 hours if sedation 
occurs. 

Chronic Poisoning 

It usually occurs in patients who are on 
benzodiazepines for treatment. Long term use 
causes tolerance. The usual features are anxiety, 
insomnia, headache, tremor and paraesthesiae when 
drug is withdrawn. 

Medico-legal Points 

As fatalities are not reported, the benzodiazepines 
are not used for homicidal purposes. The person 
may take them for committing suicide in an 
impression that he may die with high doses. 

Sometimes, benzodiazepines are used as a drug 
in drug facilitated sexual assaults. Here, the 
unsuspecting victim is given drug (like 
benzodiazepines) mixed in cold drinks or alcohol 
at a party. The person when gets drowsy, may be 
sexually assaulted. This is commonly called date 
rape and has been described earlier. 


CFMT-36 (3rd Proof).p65 


298 


8/12/07, 9:45 AM 


















CHAPTER 

Cerebral Poisons—Deliriant 
Poisons 


Deliriant poisons act on the brain and cause 
delirium, i.e. confusion with altered sense of 
consciousness. The person may have delusions, 
hallucinations or excitement. The common 
examples include dhatura, cannabis and cocaine. 

DHATURA 

The plant grows all over India and is considered 
to be blessed by Lord Shiva. It is sometimes 
offered to Lord Shiva in puja. It belongs to the 
family Solanaceae. There are two varieties: first 
Datura alba, a white flowered plant and Datura 
Niger, a black or purple flowered plant. Both 
varieties have bell-shaped flowers and have 
spherical fruits which are covered with sharp 
spinous projections and have yellowish-brown 
seeds. Another variety. Datura stramonium, 
commonly called thorn apple, grows in high 
reaches of the Himalayas. All parts of the plant 
are poisonous but seeds and fruits are more 
poisonous. The active principles present in dhatura 
plant are hyoscine, hyoscyamine and traces of 
opium. The dried leaves of some dhatura plants 
are used in preparation of some medicines. The 
seeds of dhatura have resemblance to chilly seeds 
but they are very bitter in taste (Fig. 37.1). 

Symptoms 

The symptoms of dhatura poisoning are described 
in classic phrases like blind as bat, hot as hare, dry 




Fig. 37.1 Dhatura plant along with fruit and seeds. 


as a bone, red as beet and mad as wet hen. The 
common clinical features are described in the 
following “Ds”: 

1. Dryness of mouth along with nausea and 
vomiting due to gastric irritation (dry as 
bone). 

2. Dysphagia due to irritation of gut. 

3. Dilated pupils with flushed appearance of 
face (red as beet). 

4. Diplopia with red injected conjunctivae 
(blind as bat). 

5. Dry, hot skin, sometimes rash may be seen 
(hot as hare). 

6. Drunken gait. 


CFMT-37 (3rd Proof).p65 


299 


8/12/07, 9:45 AM 


























300 Concise Textbook of Forensic Medicine and Toxicology 


7. Delirium—confusion, headache, halluci¬ 
nations, delusions. Hallucinations of sight 
and hearing are common (mad as wet hen). 

8. Drowsiness. 

9. Dysuria—pain while passing urine. 

10. Death due to respiratory failure. 

Delirium in dhatura poisoning is peculiar. The 
person is restless and very excited. Sometimes, he 
mutters words or remains silent. Usually the person 
is noisy, tries to run away from bed, picks at bed 
clothes and tries to pull imaginary threads from the 
tip of his fingers. These are all symptoms due to 
anticholinergic effects of active principles present 
in the seeds. 

Fatal Dose 

About 50-100 seeds. 

Fatal Period 

About 24 hours. 

Treatment 

1. The gastric lavage should be done 
immediately with water or potassium 
permanganate. Since due to poisoning, there 
is decreased gastrointestinal motility, lavage 
is useful even in later stages. Activated 
charcoal may be given as it helps in reducing 
the absorption of toxins from gut. 

2. The vital organs should be supported and 
taken care of. 

3. Antidote therapy: Physostigmine acts as a 
physiological antidote and it reverses the 
effects of poisoning. It is given as 1-2 mg 
slowly intravenously over five minutes. The 
same dose can be repeated every ten minutes 
till cessation of life threatening condition. 
Indications for use of physostigmine are 
severe hallucinations and agitation, supra¬ 
ventricular tachycardia and uncontrollable 
convulsions. The disadvantage of physo¬ 


stigmine is that it can precipitate convulsions 
and cholinergic crisis. So, it must be used 
with caution. 

4. The hypothermia should be controlled by 
clothing. 

Post-mortem Appearance 

Dhatura seeds can be seen in stomach and intestine. 
The gut is entirely congested. 

Medico-legal Significance 

Dhatura is widely used as an stupefying agent. The 
extract of seeds is mixed with food and is given to 
unsuspecting persons with an intention to rob, rape 
or harm. Usually, the seed extract is mixed in prasad 
and is given to co-passengers in train with an 
intention to rob them. The extract may be given to 
children to stupefy them and kidnap them. 

The seeds and leaves of the plant are mixed 
with tobacco or ganja and smoked in chillum (pipe). 
Sometimes, extract of seeds is added to alcohol to 
increase potency. Some people consume dhatura 
seeds as aphrodisiac but it is not effective as it does 
not have such properties. Dhatura seeds resist 
putrefaction, so they can be detected for a long time. 
Accidental poisoning is reported. Some Sadhus 
especially in the Himalayan region consume 
dhatura on a regular basis due to religious practice. 
Homicidal poisoning is rare but reported. 

ATROPA BELLADONA 

It is also known as deadly ‘nightshade’. This plant 
belongs to the family Solanaceae and grows mostly 
in the Himalayan range. The leaves, berries and 
root, all parts of the plant are poisonous. Atropine, 
hyoscyamine and belladonnine are the active 
principles present. The most important is atropine. 

Symptoms 

They are same as that described in dhatura 
poisoning. 


CFMT-37 (3rd Proof).p65 


300 


8/12/07, 9:45 AM 


















Cerebral Poisons—Deliriant Poisons 301 


Fatal Dose 

80 grains of root is sufficient to kill a person. 

Fatal Period 

3-6 hours. 

Medico-legal Significance 

Accidental poisoning is common among children 
due to consumption of berries or seeds. Suicidal 
and homicidal poisoning is rare. 

CANNABIS SATIVA 

Cannabis sativa or Indian hemp grows wildly all 
over India and is also cultivated under government 
orders. The male and female plants are different. 
The female plant is taller about 4-6 metres and has 
darker and luxuriant foliage than the male. The 
word “cannabis” is used for the flowering and 
fruiting tops of the plant. It yields a sticky, 
amorphous resin called ‘cannabinone’. The active 
principles in this resin are mainly cannabinol a 
colourless oily liquid, cannabidiol, cannabinolic 
acid and many tetrahydrocannabinol isomers. 

The following are the common forms in which 
the plant cannabis sativa is used: 

1. Bhang or Siddi, Patti or Sabji: Bhang 
consists of dried leaves and flowering or 
fruiting shoots. Bhang is consumed all over 
India in religious festivals mainly during 
Holi. It is also a part of thandai, a beverage 
used in summer to cool off. Bhang leaves 
are usually rubbed on stone to be used in 
beverages and then it is mixed with sugar 
and pepper to form bolus which are then 
consumed. 

2. Majun: This is a confection prepared by 
treating bhang with sugar, flour, milk and 
butter. It has a sweet taste. It is used in 
making sweets. Sometimes, dhatura is also 
mixed with majun to enhance intoxication. 


3. Ganja: It is resinous extract of flowering 
tops or fruiting tops of female plant. It is 
mixed with tobacco and usually smoked in 
chillum (pipes). 

4. Charas: It is also known as hashish. It is a 
concentrated resin obtained from leaves and 
stem of the plant. It is dark green or brown 
in colour. It is smoked with tobacco in pipes. 
It is the most potent intoxicant of cannabis. 

5. Marijuana (Marihuana, pot, weed or 
grass): The cut leaves and flowering tops 
are crushed and smoked in a pipe along with 
tobacco or in cigarette. The common word 
is grass or joint. 

Symptoms 

The effect of C. sativa is more when it is inhaled 
rather than ingested in food. There are two stages 
of symptoms: 

1. Stage of Inebriation and Release of 
Inhibitions: There is immediate excitement, 
euphoria with drowsiness and disorientation. 
There may be uncontrollable laughter, 
marked increase in appetite, particularly of 
sweets and muscular incoordination. The 
perception of time and space is lost. 
Hallucinations are common. Tachycardia and 
conjunctival congestion are seen. If large 
doses are taken, nausea, confusion and 
delusions may be seen. The characteristic 
smell of burnt rope is observed which is 
typical of cannabis preparations. The ataxia, 
dryness of mouth, and numbness in skin may 
be seen. 

2. Stage of Narcosis: If the dose is severe and 
the person does not recover from stage I, he 
passes into the stage of narcosis with bloodshot 
eyes. He goes into deep sleep. In majority of 
the time there is recovery after prolonged 
sleep. Death is very rare but can occur due to 
respiratory failure if large doses are taken. 


CFMT-37 (3rd Proof).p65 


301 


8/12/07, 9:45 AM 


















302 Concise Textbook of Forensic Medicine and Toxicology 


Chronic Poisoning 

It usually occurs in persons who are chronic users 
of cannabis and are addicted to it. The common 
symptoms are loss of appetite, general weakness, 
emaciation, trembling, impotence and, moral and 
mental deterioration. Mental changes include 
apathy and psychosis. The person may have 
delusions and hallucinations. Gynaecomastia and 
increased susceptibility to infections are seen. 

Fatal Dose 

Usually, death is not reported. Death may occur if 
cannabinol is given intravenously in a dose of 30 
mg/kg body weight. 

Fatal Period 

Since death is very rare, fatal period is uncertain. 

Post-mortem Appearance 

Nothing characteristic. The organs may be found 
to be congested. Burnt rope-like smell may be 
observed due to cannabis. 

Treatment 

Mostly symptomatic. Do the gastric lavage if the 
person has ingested. Keep respiration and 
circulation maintained. Recovery is seen with 
prolonged sleep. 

Medico-legal Significance 

Most of the time, ingestion and inhalation of 
cannabis is voluntary. Sometimes, bhang may be 
used to stupefy a person to loot, rape or commit a 
crime. Cannabis is a drug of abuse commonly used 
all over the world. Physical dependence is 
uncommon but some withdrawal symptoms in 
form of insomnia, irritability, anorexia may persist 
for days. 


Run-amok 

This is a temporary insanity observed in cannabis 
abusers who are consuming it for a long time. In 
this, a person may become violent and may start 
running wildly. He may stab or shoot anyone who 
is coming in the way. Spate of stabbing or shooting 
is due to disturbed state of mind. Such a person 
may commit suicide later, or is shot by the police 
who try to control him but shoot him when not 
possible. 

COCAINE 

The common names for cocaine are crack, snow, 
coke, Cadillac, and white lady. Cocaine is an 
alkaloid derived from leaves of plant Erythroxylon 
coca. This plant originally grew in South America 
but now is cultivated in India, Sri Lanka and Java. 
Nowadays, cocaine is synthetically made. An ester 
of benzoic acid and a base containing nitrogen is 
synthetic cocaine. It is a colourless, odourless, 
crystalline substance with a bitter taste. It dissolves 
easily in alcohol but not in water. Once taken, it 
causes numbness of the tongue and mucous 
membrane of mouth. 

Cocaine hydrochloride is used in medical 
practice. It is used as local anaesthetic in ophthalmic 
practice, dental and in minor operative procedures. 
Previously, cocaine was part of the Brompton 
cocktail which was given to relieve pain in terminal 
cases of cancers. Alcohol, morphine, and 
chlorpromazine were other constituents of this 
cocktail. 

Acute Poisoning 

Cocaine can be taken into the body by insufflation 
(snorting or sniffing), by smoking, ingestion and 
by intravenous route. There are three stages in acute 
poisoning: 

Stage I: It is the stage of early stimulation. 

There is sense of well being, euphoria, 

excitement, and talkativeness. Dryness of 


CFMT-37 (3rd Proof).p65 


302 


8/12/07, 9:45 AM 


















Cerebral Poisons—Deliriant Poisons 303 


mouth and throat is seen. Tachycardia, 
hypertension and hyperthermia are seen. 
Vertigo and nausea may be there. There is 
numbness in mouth. 

Stage II: It is a stage of advanced 
stimulation in which hallucinations are seen. 
Vomiting, muscle twitching, hyperthermia 
(cocaine fever), dyspnoea, and convulsion 
may be seen. Circulatory and respiratory 
systems start failing. 

Stage III: It is a stage of depression where 
paralysis of muscles, loss of reflexes, and 
coma are seen. Death may occur. 

Fatal Dose 

About 1.25 gm, if ingested by mouth. Very low 
doses may kill if cocaine is given intravenously or 
hypodermically. 

Fatal Period 

It may vary from a few minutes to a few hours 
depending on the dose. 

Treatment 

Gastric lavage should be done immediately. 
Activated charcoal may be given. The rest of the 
treatment is on conservative lines. Convulsions 
should be managed with barbiturates or 
benzodiazepines. Hypertension should be tackled 
with beta blockers. Ice water bath may be given 
for hyperthermia. The cardiac arrhythmias should 
be controlled with drugs. 

Chronic Poisoning (Cocainism) 

Chronic abusers of cocaine become addictive to 
cocaine. Since cocaine is very costly, mostly rich 
people become addicted to it. Usually, it is 
snorted or snuffed. Smoking (crack) is also 
popular. Once the person consumes cocaine, 
there is euphoria (rush) followed by depression 
(crash) after an hour. The person may feel 
compelled to take more cocaine. 


Symptoms 

Usual symptoms are anorexia, pale face, sunken 
eyes, insomnia, digestive disturbances, impotence, 
defective memory, physical and moral 
degeneration, mydriasis, tachycardia, hypertension 
and tachypnoea. Mental changes include 
hallucinations, delusions of persecution, depression 
and derangement of special senses. 

Magnan Symptoms (Cocaine bugs) 

Tactile hallucinations are common. Feeling of 
crawling of insects on skin or sand bags lying under 
the skin are reported. There may be marked itching 
on the skin. The tongue and teeth may be jet black. 
Chronic complication of nasal insufflation in the 
form of rhinitis, nasal erosions or perforation or 
sinusitis may be seen. Chronic cough or bronchitis 
may be seen due to smoking. Due to chronic use 
through intravenous route, the person may have 
infection and thrombosis of vein. Since cocaine 
users share needles too, they may have high risk of 
AIDS infection. 

Treatment 

The chronic addicts of cocaine need hospitalisation 
to control withdrawal symptoms. 

Medico-legal Significance 

Accidental deaths have been reported with 
overdoses. Cocaine is widely used as drug of abuse. 
Sometimes, it is smuggled across countries by 
individuals by swallowing several small plastic 
bags or balloons or condoms filled with cocaine 
and then they take flight to other countries. Once 
reaching the destination, they take purgative to pass 
these bags through stool. Sometimes, small packets 
are kept in rectum or vagina. Once these packets 
are retrieved, they are cleaned and sold at very high 
prices. This process is called Body packer 
syndrome or Bodystuffing. Sometimes, these 
packets rupture inside stomach or rectum and a 
large dose of cocaine is released. The person may 


CFMT-37 (3rd Proof).p65 


303 


8/12/07, 9:45 AM 


















304 Concise Textbook of Forensic Medicine and Toxicology 


die because of such dose. Such persons are 
sometimes caught at airport and may be brought 
for medical examination. X-ray and ultrasound can 
be done to see bags and purgative or enema is given 
to retrieve such bags. Sometimes, prostitutes inject 
a solution of cocaine into vagina. This gives the 
individual who is having sex with them a sense of 
local constriction and hence more pleasure. But the 
person can get intoxicated as cocaine gets absorbed. 

Cocaine can be identified in urine by thin layer 
chromatography, as some parts passes into urine. 
Suicidal poisoning by cocaine is reported. 
Homicidal poisoning is rare. 

AMPHETAMINE 

It is a psychotropic drug. A psychotropic substance 
is defined as that which affects psychic function, 
behaviour, or experience of an individual. 
Amphetamine was first synthesised in 1887. It was 
used in medicine for therapeutic effect for the 
treatment of narcolepsy, attention deficit disorder and 
some forms of hypotension. But since it was misused 
too much, amphetamine is not used for therapeutic 
purposes now. Chemically it is phenyl 
propanolamine. Amphetamine is also used for 
reduction of weight. Amphetamine is a very powerful 
stimulant of CNS and circulatory system. It enhances 
the synaptic concentration of dopamine and 
norepinephrine either by direct release from storage 
vesicles or by inhibition of re-uptake. 

Acute Poisoning 

Methamphetamine is commonly used as stimulant 
by both oral and intravenous route. Sometimes it is 
also smoked. 

The major features of acute poisoning are due 
to CNS stimulation and sympathomimetic actions. 
CNS symptoms include euphoria, restlessness, 
anxiety, seizures and coma. Intracranial 
haemorrhages may occur due to hypertension and 
vasculitis. Systemic features include sweating, 
tremors, muscle fasciculations, rigidity, 
tachycardia, hypertension, cardiac arrhythmias and 
myocardial infarction. 


Gangrene may also occur due to vasospasm 
caused by amphetamines. Hyperthermia may also 
be there. Renal failure may occur. 

Chronic Poisoning 

It is seen in chronic abusers. Amphetamine 
psychosis is reported in which stereotyping is seen. 
In this, person may keep on doing repetitive 
activities like grooming, cleaning, rearranging. 
Paranoid behaviour along with delusions is seen. 
Visual hallucinations are reported. Gilles de la 
Tourette syndrome seen in chronic poisoning is 
characterised by tics, eyes blinking and jaw jerks. 
Cardiomyopathies and intracranial haemorrhages 
are also observed. 

Fatal Dose 

About 250 mg. 

Treatment 

The treatment is symptomatic. Gastric lavage may be 
done if drug is ingested. Treat agitation with 
haloperidol. Hyperthermia is controlled by a cold bath. 
Seizures may be controlled with anticonvulsants. 

Medico-legal Significance 

Since amphetamine is a very potent CNS stimulant, 
it is widely used for keeping awake for a very long 
time. It is abused by medical students, truck drivers, 
night workers, etc, for waking long hours to 
complete work. It is also used by young persons in 
rave parties to keep on dancing all night. Some of 
the derivatives of amphetamine are called designer 
drugs, love drugs, ecstasy, or eve. 

LYSERGIC ACID DIETHYLAMIDE (LSD) 

The common street names are acid, purple haze, 
white lightning or microdot. It is crystalline, 
colourless, tasteless and water soluble. (It is a very 


CFMT-37 (3rd Proof).p65 


304 


8/12/07, 9:45 AM 


















Cerebral Poisons—Deliriant Poisons 305 


strong hallucinogen known till date.) It was widely 
used by hippies in 1960s. 

Clinical Features 

LSD is usually taken orally but it can be dissolved 
and snorted for quick results. The initial features 
are nausea, flushing, chills, tachycardia, 
hypertension, piloerection and tremors. Slowly 
psychic affects starts in. It includes affective 
liability, time distortion, visual illusions, sound 
magnification and distortion and a blending of 
sensory modalities called synesthesia. It is like 
feeling colours and seeing of sounds. The 
hallucinations are very pleasant and dreamy. It may 
last for 6-12 hours. If strong dose is taken, death 
may occur due to coma, respiratory arrest, 
hypertension or convulsions. 

Fatal Dose 

About 500 ,ugm is fatal. 

Treatment 

Do gastric lavage and symptomatic treatment. 


PHENCYCLIDINE 

The common names are angel dust, peace pill, hog, 
rocket fuel, etc. It was initially marketed for 
veterinary use as an anaesthetic agent, later it was 
widely abused in America. It is not very popular in 
India. It can be snorted, smoked, ingested or 
injected. It produces generalised loss of pain 
perception. It has also CNS stimulant affect. 

Clinical Features 

Mild intoxication causes lethargy, euphoria, 
hallucinations and occasionally violent behaviour. 
Nystagmus both horizontal and vertical is commonly 
seen. Severe intoxication causes hypertension, 
hypothermia, tachycardia, seizures and coma. Self¬ 
destructive behaviour is sometimes seen. 

Toxic Dose 

150-200 mg of phencyclidine is fatal while street 
dose in 1-6 mg. 

Medico-legal Significance 

Phencyclidine is commonly used as drug of abuse along 
with other drugs like marijuana leaves or cocaine. 


CFMT-37 (3rd Proof).p65 


305 


8/12/07, 9:45 AM 


















CHAPTER 

38 

Spinal Poisons 


STRYCHNOUS NUX VOMICA 

It is also called Kuchila. It belongs to family 
Loganiaceae. It grows in Tamil Nadu, Malabar and 
Uttar Pradesh. The ripe fruit of plant contains seeds 
which are very poisonous (Fig. 38.1). Nux vomica 
seeds are flat, circular disc, or slightly convex on 
one side and concave on the other. The size varies 
from 2.2 to 2.5 cm and is about 0.6 cm in thickness. 
The seeds are ash-grey in colour and have a shining 
surface with short hair. The seeds are tough, possess 
no odour and are very bitter in taste. Strychnine 
and brucine are the main active principles along 
with strychnic, gastric or caffeotannic acid. A 
glucoside named loganin is also present in the 
seeds. The bark, wood and leaves of the plant 
contain only brucine. 

1. Strychnine: The chemical formula is 
C 21 H 22 O 2 N. It is colourless, odourless, seen 
in rhombic prism form. It has very bitter 


taste. It dissolves in alcohol but not in water. 
Strychnine is a part of several vermin killers. 
It is a respiratory stimulant and rodenticide. 
Strychnine is mixed with some food 
material and then used as rodenticide. 

2. Brucine: The chemical formula is 
C 23 H 26 O 4 N 2 . It is also colourless and has 
prismatic crystalline form and a bitter taste. 
It resembles strychnine in physiological 
action but it is only one-eighth poisonous 
as compared to strychnine. 

Mechanism of Action 

Strychnine is a spinal poison. The main site of action 
is anterior horn cells. It acts by competitively 
antagonising the inhibitory neurotransmitter glycine 
by blocking its postsynaptic uptake by brain stem 
and spinal cord receptors. GABA, the 
neurotransmitter for pre-synaptic inhibitory neurons 
is not affected by strychnine. 



Fig. 38.1 Nux vomica plant along with seeds. 


306 


8/12/07, 9:46 AM 


CFMT-38 (3rd Proof).p65 






















Spinal Poisons 307 


Symptoms 

Nux vomica seeds are effective only when they are 
crushed or chewed before swallowing. As the 
pericarp in quite hard and indigestible, if whole 
seeds are taken through mouth without chewing, 
no poisoning symptoms are seen. The following 
are the main features: 

1. A severe nausea is seen, vomiting may be 
there as the taste is very bitter. 

2. Since the whole nervous system is excited, 
convulsions affect all the muscles at a time. 
Firstly clonic convulsions are seen, later 
tonic convulsions also follow. They keep on 
coming and intervals become shorter and 
paroxysm longer. 

3. Face is cyanosed, wears an apprehensive 
look of impending death. Eyes are staring 
and eye balls become prominent. The pupils 
are dilated. The facial features are drawn 
into a grin (Risus sardonicus). It is due to 
spasm of facial muscles. The froth may be 
seen on the face. 

4. The body may be seen arch-shaped in 
following postures — 

(a) Opisthotonos: Hyperextension. The 
person may be resting on heels and occipit. 

(b) Emprosthotonos: The spasm of 
abdominal muscles may bend the body 
forward. 


(c) Pleurothotonos: The body may be 
flexed to one side. 

5. The person is conscious and mind is clear 
till death. 

6 . There is an immense reflex excitability. 
Even a small stimulus like light or noise or 
movement of the body may throw it into a 
spate of convulsions. 

7. Death usually occurs due to asphyxia as 
respiration is affected by muscle spasm. 

The symptoms of strychnine poisoning closely 

resemble tetanus poisoning. The differences are 

given in Table 38.1. 

Fatal Dose 

The usual fatal dose is 60-100 mg of strychnine. 

One crushed seed is fatal. 

Fatal Period 

The usual fatal period is 1- 2 hours. 

Treatment 

Nux vomica poisoning can be treated by following 

methods: 

1. Immediately shift the patient to a dark room. 
No noise or any stimulus to be aroused to 
excite convulsions. 

2. Secure airways. Start artificial respiration 
and oxygen therapy. 


Table 38.1 Differentiating features of strychnine and tetanus poisoning 



Features 

Strychnine poisoning 

Tetanus poisoning 

1 . 

History 

Circumstantial evidence of poisoning, 
ingestion of food 

History of injury 

2. 

Onset 

Sudden 

Gradual 

3. 

Fever 

Not usual 

Usually present 

4. 

Affection 
of muscles 

All muscles are affected simultaneously 

Not all muscles affected simultaneously 

5. 

Rigidity 

Relaxation of muscles seen in between 

convulsions 

Sustained rigidity even between convulsions 

6. 

Chemical 

analysis 

Strychnine may be demonstrated 

No poison is detected. Microbiological test 
positive 


CFMT-38 (3rd Proof).p65 


307 


8/12/07, 9:46 AM 





















308 Concise Textbook of Forensic Medicine and Toxicology 


3. Convulsions should be controlled with short¬ 
acting barbiturates like sodium pentobarbital 
or by benzodiazepines like diazepam. 

4. When spasms are under control, do the 
gastric lavage with potassium permanganate. 

5. To enhance excretion of strychnine, 
acidification of urine can be done. 

6 . Maintain patient on diazepam till convulsions 
are completely gone. 

Post-mortem Findings 

Rigor mortis sets in early but persists for a longer 
time. The mucous membrane may show congestion 
or erosion. The features of asphyxial death are seen. 
Post-mortem caloricity may be seen in some cases. 
Strychnine resists putrefaction and hence can be 
detected by chemical analysis long after death. In 
addition to routine viscera, heart, brain and spinal 
cord should be preserved in all cases of suspected 
poisoning. 

Medico-legal Significance 

Strychnine was previously used as purgative, 
appetite suppressant, aphrodisiac and a constituent 
of “nerve toxins.” Nowadays, it is not used for 
medicinal purposes. Strychnine is used as 
rodenticide and for killing dogs. Sometimes, nux 
vomica seeds are used for killing cattle. Suicidal 
poisoning is rare but some cases of homicidal 
poisoning have been reported. Accidental poisoning 
has been reported on occasions. Strychnine is 
sometimes used as an arrow poison. Strychnine is 
a cumulative poison as it retards its own secretion 
by contraction of renal vessels. 

PERIPHERAL NERVE POISONS 

These poisons act on motor end of nerve terminals. 
The most important among this group are curare 
and conium. Poisoning by them is quite rare. 


Curare 

It is a black resinoid mass obtained from bark and 
wood of the plant Strychnos curare. The active 
principles are curarine and curine. They act by 
blocking the action of acetylcholine by competitive 
inhibition at neuromuscular junction. 

Symptoms 

Curare is poisonous only when injected. If given 
orally, it does not produce any symptom. When 
injected, it first affects the muscles of toes, ears 
and eyes and then those of neck and limbs. Finally, 
it affects muscles of breathing. Death occurs due 
to respiratory paralysis. Death is quite fast. 
Consciousness is retained till the end. Other 
symptoms include headache, vertigo, mydriasis and 
blurred vision. 

Fatal Dose 

30-60 mg. 

Fatal Period 

Few hours. 

Treatment 

Ligature should be tied proximal to the site of 
injection to retard absorption. Atropine 0.6-1.2 mg 
followed by neostigmine 5-10 mg intravenously 
should be given. Respiration and circulation should 
be taken care of. 

Medico-legal Significance 

D-tubocurarine is used to facilitate skeletal muscle 
relaxation during general anaesthesia. Curare may 
be used in strychnine poisoning, tetanus and ECT 
therapy in psychosis. Curare is also used as arrow 
poison by tribals in South America. 

Conium Maculatum (Hemlock) 

It is also called Socrates poison as he was given 
this to die. Hemlock, is a term loosely applied to 


CFMT-38 (3rd Proof).p65 


308 


8/12/07, 9:46 AM 


















Spinal Poisons 309 


several plants and trees of toxicity. The commonest 
is Conium maculatum. It is a weed-like shrub 
belonging to family Apiaceae. The root of this plant 
is very toxic along with all parts of plant. They 
contain many alkaloids chiefly coniine, conhydrine 
and N-methyl coniine. 

Symptoms 

Ingestion of fresh leaves causes nausea, heart burn 
and may give mousy odour to breath. Vomiting, 
gastric irritation and diarrhoea may be seen. Later, 
it causes tremor, ataxia and ascending paralysis of 
the body. Miosis may be seen. Progressive motor 
paralysis causes death from respiratory failure. 
Bradycardia and hypotension may be seen. 

Fatal Dose 

60 mg of coniine. 


Fatal Period 

Few hours. 

Treatment 

Gastric lavage and supportive treatment. 

Medico-legal Significance 

Poisoning may be due to ingestion or injection. 
Hemlock was known as state poison in ancient 
Greece. Famous philosopher Socrates was given 
this state poison to drink and die. 

Accidental poisoning has been reported as root 
of the plant resembles wild carrot and a person may 
consume it by mistake. 


CFMT-38 (3rd Proof).p65 


309 


8/12/07, 9:46 AM 


















CHAPTER 

39 

Cardiac Poisons 


TOBACCO (NICOTIANA TABACUM) 

Tobacco plant is a native plant of America but now 
it is widely grown all over India. It belongs to the 
family Solanaceae. Tobacco is largely consumed 
in India. The dried leaves are smoked in form of 
cigarettes or in a hookah. Tobacco leaves are mixed 
in pa an or they are mixed with lime and taken in 
form of kheni. Kheni is widely consumed in parts 
of north India, mainly Uttar Pradesh and Bihar. 
Many companies manufacture bidi or cigarettes 
made of dried tobacco leaves. 

Nicotine and nicotianine are the two active 
principles found in tobacco: 

1. Nicotine: The chemical formula is 
C 10 H 14 N 2 . It is present in all parts of the 
plant but more in leaves. Consumption of 
nicotine firstly causes stimulation and then 
depression of vagal and autonomic ganglia. 
It also stimulates initially cerebral and spinal 
centres but later paralyses them. Initially, 
there is pupil contraction but later dilatation 
is seen. The workers involved in industries 
like cigarettes manufacturing may suffer 
from its toxic effect. Nicotine is a colourless, 
volatile hygroscopic, oily, natural liquid 
with a burning acrid taste. It is soluble in 
water and alcohol. 

2. Nicotianine: It is also a volatile crystalline 
substance but non-toxic. 


Acute Poisoning 

If tobacco leaves are ingested by oral route, it causes 
severe gastric irritation. There is a severe burning 
pain in mouth and throat followed by salivation, 
nausea, headache, vomiting and severe diarrhoea. 
The smell of tobacco can be appreciated in breath. 
Slowly giddiness, faintness, muscular weakness, 
tremors, cold sweat and loss of consciousness is 
seen. Hearing and vision are affected. Pupils are 
first contracted but later, they are dilated. The pulse 
becomes rapid and cardiac arrhythmia are seen. 
Blood pressure rises. If a large dose is taken, pulse 
may become slow later on. The respiratory system 
is affected and the person may die due to respiratory 
failure. It happens due to paralysis of respiratory 
muscles. Sometimes, delirium, convulsions and 
areflexia are also seen. 

Fatal Dose 

In adults the lethal dose is 40-60 mg. 15-30 gm of 
crude tobacco is fatal, if taken orally. A cigarette 
contains about 10-20 mg of nicotine but by 
smoking only 1-2 mg is taken inside. 

Fatal Period 

If swallowed, nicotine may cause death in 10-15 
minutes. 


CFMT-39 (3rd Proof).p65 


310 


8/14/07, 4:15 PM 


















Cardiac Poisons 311 


Treatment 

The conservative treatment should be started at 
once. The gastric lavage should be done 
immediately with warm water containing powdered 
charcoal, tannin or a solution of potassium iodide. 
These drugs can render the alkaloid insoluble. If 
these are not available, lavage with potassium 
permanganate can be done. In the initial stages of 
mild to moderate intoxication, atropine can be 
given. But in severe cases, atropine is useless. 
Oxygen inhalation, artificial respiration and control 
of convulsions are must. Cardiac arrhythmias 
should be controlled with drugs. 

Chronic Poisoning 

Chronic poisoning with tobacco is prevalent all over 
the world due to heavy smoking. It may also be 
seen in workers working in tobacco factories. 
Chronic cough and bronchitis are common features. 
Due to smoking, pulmonary functions are retarded. 
There is a decreased ventilatory capacity. High risk 
of lung cancer is there. Due to heavy smoking, there 
is increase in coronary heart disease. Hypertension, 
myocardial infarction and depressed cardiac 
functions are seen. There is a high incidence of 
sudden death in chronic smokers. 

The persons who chew tobacco either with lime 
or in paan, have a high incidence of oral cancers 
and peptic ulcers leading to cancers. Mucosa 
cancers, lip cancers and oesophageal cancers can 
be caused and high incidence is reported. 

Dermatitis may be seen on hands and face of 
factory workers who are exposed to tobacco. The 
eyes may be affected. Amblyopia, commonly called 
‘tobacco amblyopia’, is seen. Cardiac arrhythmias 
are quite common. 

Medico-legal Significance 

Accidental poisoning among children may be seen 
as they may ingest cigarette or tobacco leaves by 
mistake. Sometimes, they may also suffer after 
drinking hookah water which contains high 


concentration of nicotine. Suicidal and homicidal 
poisonings are rare. Tobacco was earlier used for 
infanticide or to procure criminal abortion. 
Putrefaction has no effect on nicotine. So, nicotine 
can be detected even after death for a long time. 

DIGITALIS PURPUREA 

This plant belongs to the family Scrophulariaceae, 
grown in India especially in Kashmir. The root, 
leaves and seeds of this plant contain digitoxin, 
digitalin, and digitalien as active principles. 

Symptoms 

Initially, gastrointestinal symptoms are seen in the 
form of anorexia, thirst, nausea, vomiting followed 
by abdominal pain. Diarrhoea may be seen. Later, 
cardiac symptoms appear in the form of fainting, 
presence of arrhythmias, extra systoles. Initially, pulse 
may be fast, but later slows down. Heart block may 
be seen. ECG changes in form of flattened or inverted 
T-wave, depressed S-T segment, prolonged PR 
interval, heart block and ventricular tachycardia may 
be seen. The pupils may be dilated. Visual disturbances 
like fleeting spots, yellow or green vision may be there. 
Drowsiness and coma follows. Delirium may be 
followed by hallucinations or convulsions. Death 
occurs due to ventricular fibrillation. 

Fatal Dose 

2-3 gm of digitalis. 

Fatal Period 

Variable from a few hours to a day. 

Treatment 

Gastric lavage should be done and activated charcoal 
is to be given. Correct hypokalaemia, hypercalcaemia 
and hypomagnesia. For bradycardia, atropine may be 
given. Lignocaine and phenytoin are indicated for 
control of arrhythmias. Fab fragments are quite useful. 


CFMT-39 (3rd Proof).p65 


311 


8/14/07, 4:15 PM 


















312 Concise Textbook of Forensic Medicine and Toxicology 


Medico-legal Significance 

A few accidental cases have been reported in 
medical practice. Digitalis is a cumulative poison 
and its toxicity may be seen in chronic users 
suddenly without any increase in dose. Suicidal and 
homicidal poisonings are rare. 

NERIUM ODORUM (KANER OR WHITE 
OLEANDER) 

This plant belongs to the family Apocynaceae and 
is commonly known as white or sweet scented 
oleander. Its white or pink flower is commonly 
given as offerings in temples. All parts of this plant 
are poisonous. The active principle, Nefrin, a 
glycoside has been isolated from it. It is pure, 
white and has digitalis-like action. The leaves, 
bark and flowers of this plant are used in treatment 
of skin diseases, wounds, snake bite and 
gynaecological conditions. 

Symptoms 

The actions are like that of digitalis as mentioned 
earlier. 

Fatal Dose 

Not known. 

Fatal Period 

Death may occur in 24-36 hours. 

Treatment 

Same as that digitalis. 

Medico-legal Significance 

Sometimes, the root is used in the treatment of 
venereal diseases by quacks. In such conditions 
accidental poisoning can occur. Criminally, the root 


is used as abortifacient both as local application 
and ingestion. Suicidal poisonings are reported. It 
can be also used as cattle poison. 

CERBERA THEVETIA (YELLOW OLEANDER) 

It is also called pila kaner. It belongs to the family 
Apocynaceae and is grown widely in gardens. It 
has yellow be 11-shaped flowers and a green fruit 
with a nut. The plant is highly poisonous. The active 
principles namely: glycoside thevetin and cerberin, 
are present in the milky juice of the plant which 
exudes from all parts of the plant. 

Symptoms 

The actions are similar to those of digitalis as 
mentioned earlier. 

Fatal Dose 

Uncertain. 

Fatal Period 

Uncertain. 

Treatment 

On similar lines as in the case of digitalis. 

Medico-legal Significance 

Roots and seeds are used for criminal abortion or 
for suicidal/homicidal putposes. The seeds can be 
used as cattle poison. 

ACONITE (MITHA ZAHAR) 

The various names of this plant are Aconitum 
napellus or monk’s hood or wolf’s bane or blue 
rocket or mita zahar or dudhia bish (Fig. 39.1). 


CFMT-39 (3rd Proof).p65 


312 


8/14/07, 4:15 PM 


















Cardiac Poisons 313 



Fig. 39.1 Aconite root. 

It belongs to the family Ranunculacae and is 
grown all over the world. All parts of this plant are 
poisonous but root is mainly used as a poison. The 
root is usually 5-10 cm long, dark brown from 
outside and whitish and starchy internally when 
freshly cut. It is odourless but imparts a sensation of 
tingling and numbness to tongue, lips and mouth 
when chewed. The height of the plant is 2-6 feet. 

The active principle in the root and other parts 
is mainly aconitine besides picroaconitine, aconine 
and other alkaloids combined with aconitic acid. 
Aconitine forms colourless, transparent rhombic 
crystals and is not soluble in water. 

Mechanism of Action 

Aconitine first stimulates and then depresses 
peripheral termination of sensory and secretory 
nerves, CNS, CVS, skeletal and smooth nerves. The 
consciousness remains clear till death as higher 
centres are not affected. 

Indian Species of Aconite 

There are various species of aconite which grow in 
the Himalayas. Aconitum chasmanthum, which is 


known as Bish or Bikh, is commonly marketed in 
Kolkata. The root of Indian species of aconite looks 
like black, plump, heavy tuber usually 5-10 cm 
long when it is dried and stepped in oil. It has a 
disagreeable smell. It is commonly called Bish or 
Bikh or Telyabish. It is used by voids and hakims in 
the treatment of various diseases like rheumatism, 
neuralgia and paralysis. 

Symptoms 

The symptoms appear in 10-15 minutes. Initially, 
there is a sweet bitter taste followed by severe 
burning and tingling of lips, tongue, mouth and 
throat followed by numbness and anaesthesia of 
these parts. Gastric irritation symptoms like nausea, 
pain in the abdomen, vomiting starts but diarrhoea 
is rare. Tingling and fornication starts spreading 
all over the body. The person feels quite uneasy. 
Initially pupils contract and dilate alternately but 
finally dilate. Diplopia and impairment of vision is 
seen. Vertigo, restlessness, difficulty in speech, pain 
and weakness of muscles twitching and spasm of 
muscles are common symptoms. Blood pressure 
starts falling, pulse is low but slow, feeble and 
irregular. Respiration becomes slow and laboured. 
Death may occur due to respiratory failure or 
ventricular fibrillation. ECG changes include 
ectopic beats, bundle branch blocks and ventricular 
tachycardia. Consciousness is retained till end in 
most cases, but in some cases delirium or 
convulsions or coma may be seen. 

Fatal Dose 

About 2 gm of aconite root is fatal. 

Fatal Period 

It may range from a few hours to one day. 

Treatment 

Gastric lavage should be done with a solution of 
animal charcoal or tannic acid or milk. Manage the 
patient conservatively. Atropine should be given for 


CFMT-39 (3rd Proof).p65 


313 


8/14/07, 4:15 PM 




















314 Concise Textbook of Forensic Medicine and Toxicology 


bradycardia. Cardiac arrhythmias should be 
controlled with xylocaine. Artificial respiration 
should be started if needed. 

Post-mortem Appearance 

Nothing unusual. Pieces of aconite root can be seen 
in the stomach. 

Medico-legal Significance 

Accidental poisoning is reported if aconite root is 
mistaken for domestic raddish root. Aconite root is 
widely used in Indian medicine. Suicidal and 
homicidal poisoning have been reported. Aconite 
root is also used as an arrow poison by tribals in 
Nepal and Assam. These arrows are used to kill 
animals. Urine should be preserved in all suspected 
homicidal or suicidal poisoning as aconitine is 
mainly excreted in urine. Small amounts of 
aconitine can also be found in saliva, sweat and 
bile. Aconitine is not stable and is easily destroyed 
by putrefaction. Sometimes, aconite root is used 
for enhancing intoxicating properties of liquors by 
addicts. It is also used as an abortifacient. 

CYANIDE (HYDROGEN CYANIDE, HCN) 

Cyanide is one of the most powerful poisons in the 
world. It can kill in seconds. Most cases of fatalities 
occur either due to inhalation or ingestion. 

Hydrocyanic acid is quite common in nature. 
It is found in combination in the leaves of cherry- 
laurel, in bitter almonds, in the kernels of the 
common cherry, plums, apricot, peach and other 
stone fruits. It is also found in ordinary bamboo 
shoots, in certain oil seeds and beans. These plants 
contain a glucoside named amygdaline, which in 
presence of enzyme and water is converted into 
hydrocyanic acid. Hydrocyanic acid forms salt with 
metals. Potassium or sodium cyanide, mercuric 
cyanide and silver cyanides are used in 
photography, electroplating, case hardening of 
steel, silver and gold processing and dyeing. These 


salts are soluble in water and are very toxic. 
Calcium cyanide, magnesium cyanide and 
cyanogen chloride are used in mining industry. 

Cyanide is also used in plastic industry. 
Hydrocyanic acid is not found in commercial but 
only in chemical laboratories. It is used for 
fumigating houses, ships, etc. Hydrocyanic acid is 
colourless, possesses a characteristic smell of bitter 
almonds or peach kernels. The ability to smell 
cyanide is genetically owned as only some persons 
can smell cyanides, not all. Sodium nitroprusside, 
a cyanogen, is commonly used in the treatment of 
hypertension. Cyanides are also used in illegal 
manufacture of phencyclidines. Compounds like 
ferrocyanide or ferricyanide do not release 
significant amounts of cyanide So, they only cause 
gastric discomfort. 

Mechanism of Action 

The toxicity due to cyanide is caused by inhibition 
of cytochrome oxidase enzyme by formation of 
cytochrome oxidase-cyanide complex. It causes 
paralysis of electron transport system leading to 
cellular hypoxia, as oxygen cannot be utilised by 
the tissues. Due to blockade of cytochrome oxidase 
enzyme, pyruvate is converted into lactate causing 
severe metabolic acidosis. The death occurs due to 
cytotoxic hypoxia. 

Symptoms 

The poisoning can occur due to inhalation (in this, 
death may occur in minutes), ingestion, or through 
skin or mucous membrane absoiption (death may 
occur in 3-4 hours). The common route of poisoning 
is ingestion. The first symptoms are smell of bitter 
almonds in breath (20-30 per cent of population cannot 
appreciate this smell). There is acidic and burning taste, 
throat numbness, salivation, frothing at mouth, 
nausea and vomiting with substernal and epigastric 
pain. The involvement of CNS causes dizziness, 
confusion, vertigo, headache, sweating, anxiety, 
drowsiness, seizures, paralysis and finally death. 


CFMT-39 (3rd Proof).p65 


314 


8/14/07, 4:15 PM 


















Cardiac Poisons 315 


The involvement of respiratory system causes 
initially, tachypnoea and dyspnoea as a result of 
stimulation of respiratory centres and carotid 
chemoreceptors caused by local hypoxia. Later 
bradypnoea, hypopnoea and irregular respiration 
(a short inspiration and prolonged expiration), and 
pulmonary oedema is seen. Cyanosis and 
respiratory arrest follows. In cardiovascular system, 
initially hypertension along with reflex bradycardia, 
and sinus arrhythmia is seen. Later hypotension, 
tachycardia and arrhythmias are seen. ECG may 
show non-specific QRS and ST-T changes. Severe 
lactic acidosis is seen. Since venous oxygen tension 
is almost equal to arterial oxygen tension due to 
non-dissociation of oxygen, venous blood appears 
as red as that of arterial blood. If fundus is 
examined, retinal arteries and veins would appear 
equally bright red. 

Chronic Poisoning 

It is seen in photographers, gilders and workmen 
who handle cyanides. The chief symptoms are 
headache, vertigo, loss of appetite, nausea, 
constipation, bad breath, dyspnoea and anaemia. 

Fatal Dose 

50-200 mg of potassium or sodium cyanide is 
sufficient to kill. 

Fatal Period 

2-10 minutes. 

Treatment 

Time is the key factor in management of cyanide 
poisoning. The patient should be ventilated with 
100 per cent oxygen using Ambu bag. The 
important step in the treatment of cyanide poisoning 
is to produce methaemoglobinaemia. Immediately, 
place broken amyl nitrite pearls under the patient’s 
nose for 15-30 seconds every minute. 


Immediately inject sodium nitrite intravenously 
and discontinue the pearls. Administer 10 ml of 
3% sodium nitrite at the rate of 2.5-5 ml per minute. 
Nitrites cause hypotension which should be 
managed with fluids or drugs. Nitrites cause a state 
of methaemoglobinaemia which dissociates 
cyanide from cytochrome oxidase by forming 
cyanomethaemoglobin. After nitrites, sodium 
thiosulphate in a dose of 50 ml of a 25 per cent 
solution should be given. It converts cyanide from 
cyanomethaemoglobin into nontoxic thiocyanate 
which is excreted through urine. 

Once the patient is stabilised, gastric lavage 
can be preformed. The activated charcoal can be 
given initially and at the end of lavage. The gastric 
lavage may be done either by potassium 
permanganate or sodium thiosulphate. 

Another antidote which can be used is kelocyanor. 
It is dicobalt ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (dicobalt 
edetate). It also chelates cyanide. It is given in the 
dose of 300 mg intravenously over three minutes and 
repeated, if required. Sometimes, it causes severe 
laryngeal and pulmonary oedema. Vitamin B 
(hydroxycobalamin) is also used as an antidote. It 
binds cyanide into nontoxic cyanocobalamin. 
Aminophenols which produce methaemoglobinaemia 
faster than nitrites have also been used on experimental 
basis. Another experimental therapy is the use of 
stroma free methaemoglobin. 

Post-mortem Appearance 

The characteristic feature is that the skin presents 
a livid or violet colour. Post-mortem staining 
appears as bright red or pink due to 
cyanomethaemoglobin and also due to the fact that 
tissues could not take up oxygen from blood leaving 
bright red colour in veins. The features of asphyxial 
death are seen. Rigor mortis sets in early and lasts 
longer. The smell of hydrocyanic acid may be 
appreciated on opening the body. The blood is 
bright red in appearance and is fluid. Stomach may 
show congestion and haemorrhages due to the local 
action. Mouth and lips may show corrosion. 


CFMT-39 (3rd Proof).p65 


315 


8/14/07, 4:15 PM 


















316 Concise Textbook of Forensic Medicine and Toxicology 


Medico-legal Significance 

Cyanides are widely used for suicidal and 
homicidal purposes. Accidental poisonings have 
been reported from the inhalation of vapours of acid 
used as a fumigating agent. Cyanide is also formed 
as a result of putrefaction. So, in such cases, 
quantitative estimation of cyanide is essential to 
exclude cyanide poisoning. Usually, it is never more 
than one-tenth the minimum quantity to cause 
death. Oil of bitter almonds and cherry-laurel water 
is used as flavouring agents and can cause 
accidental cyanide poisoning. Cases of cattle 
poisoning by cyanide have been reported if they 
eat Juar Kadvi as it contains cyanogens. 


Some part of hydrocyanic acid is eliminated 
unchanged through lungs, so in cyanide poisoning 
it is advised to preserve at least one lung. When 
potassium cyanide is ingested through mouth, 
hydrochloric acid present in the stomach is essential 
for absorption. If a person is suffering from 
achlorhydria, he may escape poisoning by cyanide. 
It is said that Rasputin, a Russian doctor who was 
allegedly having a love affair with Russian Queen 
was administered cyanide by mouth but he escaped 
its ill effects as he was suffering from achlorhydria. 
Nowadays, cyanide capsules are carried by terrorist 
organisation individuals, who, if caught, commit 
suicide immediately. 


CFMT-39 (3rd Proof).p65 


316 


8/14/07, 4:15 PM 


















CHAPTER 

40 

Asphyxiants (Irrespirable Gases) 


CARBON DIOXIDE 

It is a colourless, odourless gas found in the 
atmosphere. The concentration of carbon dioxide 
in atmosphere is 0.04 per cent. Carbon dioxide has 
a slight acidic taste. When we respire we exude 
carbon dioxide. It is also formed as a result of 
putrefaction, fermentation and combustion. It is also 
found in high concentration in coal mines and lime 
kilns. It is also found at the bottom of deep wells, 
damp cellars, mine shafts, ship’s holds, etc. The 
carbon dioxide is also used in refrigeration as dry 
ice to keep ice creams cooled. It is also used in 
mineral aerated waters like coke, Pepsi and soda. 

Mechanism of Action 

When inhaled in dilutions of 5-7 per cent with 
oxygen, it stimulates the respiratory system. It is a 
potent vasodilator of cerebral blood vessels. It acts 
as a corrosive when applied to skin in frozen form 
(dry ice). 

Symptoms 

When the air containing 5 per cent of carbon 
dioxide is inhaled, it causes increased respiration, 
nausea, acidic taste in mouth, headache, 
giddiness and loss of muscle power. When a 
concentration of 10 per cent is reached in the air, 
it causes hyperpnoea, tinnitus, confusion, 


tremors, sweating, visual disturbances and loss 
of consciousness. If the concentration reaches 25 
per cent in the breathed air, it causes convulsions 
due to direct action on nerves causing cortical 
excitability. It may lead to death due to asphyxia. 
If a person inhales carbon dioxide in a 
concentration of 60-80 per cent, immediate loss 
of consciousness occurs leading to death. Sub¬ 
acute poisoning is seen if the concentration of 
carbon dioxide increases even up to 0.5 per cent 
in the air. It is seen in badly ventilated and over 
crowded rooms. The symptoms include fatigue, 
headache, mental confusion and irritability. Long 
term exposure causes anaemia, loss of appetite 
and fatigue. 

Treatment 

The person should be immediately removed into 
open air and artificial respiration should be started 
with oxygen. Then, an amine buffer can be given 
intravenously. Artificial respiration should be 
maintained till the person is stabilised. The vitals 
should be maintained. The patient should be 
managed on conservative treatment. 

Post-mortem Appearance 

The rate of cooling of the body is low and body 
retains heat for a longer time. Features of asphyxial 
death are seen. 


CFMT-40 (3rd Proof).p65 


317 


8/12/07, 9:46 AM 


















318 Concise Textbook of Forensic Medicine and Toxicology 


Medico-legal Significance 

Poisoning by carbon dioxide is mainly accidental 
in workers working in deep bore wells, mine shafts, 
grain pits and badly ventilated rooms. 

CARBON MONOXIDE 

Carbon monoxide is a colourless, odourless and 
tasteless gas. Carbon monoxide poisoning is quite 
common in India especially during winter when 
people use angeethi in their sleeping rooms. Carbon 
monoxide poisoning is also very common in the 
United States and other parts of the world. 

Sources of Exposure 

Carbon monoxide is formed when there is 
incomplete combustion of coal due to the lack of 
oxygen such as in the use of angeethi. It is also 
formed as a result of decomposition of organic 
substances such as oxalic acids and formic acids. 
It is also found in the gaseous products from 
charcoal fires, refineries, blast furnaces, lime kilns, 
water heaters, gas refrigerators and household fires. 
It is released in high quantity in a bomb blast. It is 
a constituent of coal gas. It is present in exhaust of 
motor vehicles especially those fueled by petrol. 

Mechanism of Toxicity 

Carbon monoxide combines with haemoglobin 
with an affinity of 200-250 times that of oxygen, 
resulting in a decrease in the oxygen carrying 
capacity of blood. But it is seen that even when 
haemoglobin levels are down to 40 per cent, the 
person does not show symptoms of poisoning. Two 
more mechanisms are involved in poisoning. 
Carbon monoxide on combining with haemoglobin 
shifts the oxygen dissociation curve to the left, 
further reducing the oxygen available to tissues. 
Also, carbon monoxide is a cellular poison per se 
as it competes with oxygen for other haemoproteins 
such as myoglobin, peroxidase, catalases and 


cytochromes. Its combination with cytochrome 
P450 is most important as it disrupts normal cellular 
metabolism. The transport of carbon monoxide to 
the cell is through plasma, not through haemoglobin 
as it does not react to haemoglobin very quickly. 
That is why, blood carboxyhaemoglobin levels may 
not be very helpful in assessing the severity of 
exposure, as it may be normal at the time of the 
measurement. 

Symptoms 

The poisoning by carbon monoxide depends on 
various factors like concentration, duration of 
exposure and level of activity of the person at that 
time. The elderly and those suffering from cardio¬ 
respiratory diseases are more vulnerable. High 
humidity, high altitude and high temperatures cause 
more severe poisoning. When inhaled in dilute 
form, the usual symptoms are tightness of forehead, 
dizziness, agitation, confusion, throbbing headache, 
nausea, noise in the ears, muscular weakness and 
inability to move. There is a generalized lethargy, 
ataxia, slurred speech, and drowsiness. The pupils 
are dilated and fixed, there is dimness of vision, 
tachypnoea and tachycardia. If carboxyhaemoglobin 
exceeds 60 per cent, hypotension and a slowing of 
pulse and respiration is seen. The colour of skin is 
not reliable to comment on poisoning (Table 40.1). 

At low level of exposure, memory, 
psychomotor and cognitive skills are decreased. 
Visual acuity is also reduced. Transient deafness, 
retrobulbar haemorrhages and retinal haemorrhages 
are reported. 

Cerebral oedema, seizures and coma are seen 
at carboxyhaemoglobin levels of 50 percent. Above 
level of 70 per cent, survival is not possible. 
Pulmonary oedema, ECG changes like ST and T 
changes, atrial fibrillation and conduction defects 
are seen. Angina and ventricular ectopics can be 
seen. Intestinal, acute hepatic and muscular necrosis 
is seen. Even myoglobinuria and myocardial 
infarction are seen sometimes. 


CFMT-40 (3rd Proof).p65 


318 


8/12/07, 9:46 AM 


















Asphyxiants (Irrespirable Gases ) 319 


Table 40.1 Poisoning of carbon monoxide 

Concentration 

Carboxy haemoglobin 

Clinical symptoms 

in atmosphere (%) 

levels (%) 


0.007 

10 

Dyspnoea on exertion 

0.012 

20 

Headache, dyspnoea, lethargy, nausea 

0.022 

30 

Headache, irritability, nausea, vomiting 
dizziness, visual acuity affected, fatigability 

0.035-0.052 

40-50 

Headache, confusion, collapse 

0.080-0.122 

60-70 

Coma, convulsions, respiratory failure 

0.195 

80 

Rapid death 


Subacute Clinical Features Intoxication During Pregnancy 


It occurs within a few days of the exposure. The 
usual clinical features are peripheral neuropathies, 
skin lesions like bullae or purpura, muscle and renal 
damage in addition to above described features. 
Muscle necrosis can lead to rhabdomyolysis, 
myoglobinuria and renal damage. Retinal 
haemorrhages, central hearing loss, cerebellar 
ataxia, aspiration pneumonia and adult respiratory 
distress syndrome are also seen. 

Delayed Clinical Features 

They are usually seen 1-3 weeks after exposure. 
Headache, nausea, dizziness, aphasia, apraxia, 
hallucinations, disorientation, bradykinesis, 
rigidity, gait disturbances and incontinence may be 
seen. Some persons progress to coma and 
convulsions. The use of hyperbaric oxygen is 
helpful in reversing some of the features. 

Chronic Poisoning 

Due to continuous mild exposure, chronic 
poisoning may develop. The clinical features are 
fatigue, headache, nausea, dizziness, difficulty in 
sleeping, impairment of thinking process, 
confusion, dyspnoea on exertion, numbness and 
tingling, chest pain, decreased visual acuity, 
diarrhoea and abdominal pain. 


If a pregnant mother inhales carbon monoxide the 
foetus is more affected than the mother. Still births 
are higher in mothers who are exposed to carbon 
monoxide. Multiple morphological abnormalities 
have been reported in live births. Telencephalic 
dysgenesis of foetus has been seen. 

Laboratory Diagnosis 

Estimation of carboxyhaemoglobin is a good 
criteria for assessment of poisoning but in some 
cases it may be misleading as levels of 
carboxyhaemoglobin starts falling once the patient 
has been removed from the site of exposure. 

Spot Test 

Dilute two drops of blood with 15 ml water and 
add five drops of 25 per cent sodium hydroxide. 
The presence of pink colour will confirm 
carboxyhaemoglobin. Other things that point 
towards poisoning are metabolic acidosis, ECG 
changes, hyperglycaemia, raised SGOT and SGPT 
levels. CT scan of head may show symmetrical and 
diffuse low density lesions in globus pallidus. These 
are characteristics of poisoning. The basal ganglia 
may eventually be calcified. 

Treatment 

Once the diagnosis is based on the history of 
exposure and clinical assessment, the treatment 


CFMT-40 (3rd Proof).p65 


319 


8/12/07, 9:46 AM 





















320 Concise Textbook of Forensic Medicine and Toxicology 


should be started at once. The first step is to remove 
the person from the site of exposure. Hundred per 
cent oxygen should be started by mask. Mild 
poisoning requires oxygen treatment for about 4- 
6 hours. In severe cases, hyperbaric oxygen should 
be used. The indications for starting hyperbaric 
oxygen are any history of loss of consciousness, 
neurological impairment, carboxyhaemoglobin 
more than 30-40 per cent, cardiac arrhythmias, 
syncope or pulmonary oedema. Hyperbaric oxygen 
is generally used at a pressure of three atmosphere. 
Hyperbaric oxygen is quite useful in controlling 
delayed complications. But the side effects of 
hyperbaric oxygen include barotraumas, ear pain 
and oxygen toxicity leading to convulsions. 
Experimental therapy includes the use of 
allopurinol along with N-acetyl cysteine. 
Allopurinol retards the production of free radicals 
while N-acetyl cysteine replenishes the reducing 
power of cells. If hyperbaric oxygen is not 
available, use of hypothermia is recommended to 
reduce metabolic demands. 

Post-mortem Appearance 

The lips and fingernails show a bright red colour. 
Irregular patches of bright red colour are seen 
scattered over anterior surface. The post-mortem 
staining shows the same bright red colour. The 
blood in the vessels is seen to be bright red and 
fluid. The internal organs also appear bright red 
due to the colour of the blood. The mucous 
membranes also appear bright red. The lungs are 
congested and oedematous. The findings suggest 
asphyxial death. Punctiform haemorrhages and 
softening in the cerebral cortex and corpus striatum 
particularly globus pallidus may be seen. 

Medico-legal Significance 

The carbon monoxide poisoning is mostly 
accidental. It is commonly seen in north India 
where people use angeethi to warm up their 
sleeping rooms tightly closed. It is also seen in 


workers who work to repair old wells. Accidental 
poisoning also occurs in motor garages, over¬ 
crowded rooms, ill-ventilated rooms. Suicidal 
poisoning is reported where a person trying to 
commit suicide shuts himself in a car and puts pipe 
from exhaust into the car and closes the car doors. 
Homicidal use of carbon monoxide is reported, but 
quite rarely. Putrefaction has no effect on carboxy¬ 
haemoglobin, therefore its levels can be estimated 
even several days after death. 

WAR GASES 

It denotes chemical warfare. The term “gas” used 
in such context denotes a chemical compound 
whether gas, liquid or solid which is employed to 
produce poisonous or irritant effect on enemy forces 
or civil population. The following are the common 
compounds used in chemical warfare: 

1 . Vesicating Agents : The common vesicating 
or blistering agents are mustard gas 
(dichlorodiethyl chloride) and lewisite 
(chlorovinyl dichloramine). Mustard gas 
was widely used in world wars. It causes 
irritation in the eyes, lacrimation, nasal 
secretion, laryngitis and severe gastric pain. 
It affects skin locally and causes itching, 
redness, vesication and ulceration. Axilla, 
groin and perineum are severely affected. 
Death occurs due to infections. Lewisite is 
a vesicant and asphyxiant. It is more severe 
in action as compared to mustard gas. It 
affects in the same manner as mustard gas. 

2. Asphyxiants: The common asphyxiants 
used are chlorine, phosgene (carbonyl 
chloride), diphosgene, and chloropicrin. 
Phosgene is one of the most poisonous gases 
known to mankind. They cause intense 
respiratory discomfort by irritation, and 
cause death by asphyxia. 

3. Tear Gases: 1-chloro-acetophenone (CAP 
or CN) and bromobenzyl cyanide (BBC.) 
are mainly used as tear gases. These gases 
are widely used all over the world for riot 


CFMT-40 (3rd Proof).p65 


320 


8/12/07, 9:46 AM 


















Asphyxiants (Irrespirable Gases ) 321 


control by police. They cause severe 
ir ritation in the eyes leading to flow of tears, 
spasm of eyelids and even temporary 
blindness. It can also cause some respiratory 
discomfort. The treatment includes washing 
eyes with water. 

4. Nasal Irritants: These are organic 
compounds of arsenic which are converted 
to gaseous form when heated, and can cause 


nasal irritation. They cause intense pain in 
nose, sneezing, headache, salivation, 
vomiting and temporary prostration. 

5. Paralysants: These are mainly hydrocyanic 
acid and sulphuretted hydrogen. They are 
not used at mass level. 

6. Nerve Gases: They are usually related to 
phosphate esters and produce vapours. The 
exact formulae are not known. 


CFMT-40 (3rd Proof).p65 


321 


8/12/07, 9:46 AM 


















CHAPTER 

41 

Food Poisoning 


The term food poisoning denotes any illness that 
occurs after eating or drinking some food material. 
It may be of the following types: 

1. Bacterial 

2. Food poisoning because of poisonous plants 
like mushrooms 

3. Food poisoning through animals like 
poisonous fish 

4. Chemical food poisoning when some 
chemicals are added into the food material. 

BACTERIAL FOOD POISONING 

It is the most common type of food poisoning. It is 
usually caused by the following organisms: 

1 . Staphylococcus: This is the most common 
bacterial food poisoning. It usually starts 
within 1-8 hours after consumption of milk, 
milk products, meat, etc. The usual clinical 
feature is intense vomiting. The onset is 
sudden. Usually, recovery is seen in a day. 
Most of the time, no treatment is required 
except electrolytes to correct dehydration. 

2. Bacillus cereus: This poisoning is 
characterised by primary symptoms of 
diarrhoea and vomiting. The incubation 
period varies from 3-16 hours. There are two 
types of toxins present in this poisoning. One 
is heat labile and the other is heat stable. This 


poisoning occurs through contaminated food 
like fried rice, dried fruit and powdered milk. 
The treatment is mainly symptomatic and 
supplement of electrolytes is required. 

3. Clostridium botulinum: This is one of the 
most lethal poisoning. It was first reported 
following ingestion of uncooked sausages, 
thus deriving the name from ‘botulismus’ 
meaning sausage. The Clostridium bacteria 
generates a toxin which blocks acetylcholine 
at the neuromuscular junction producing a 
bilaterally symmetrical descending motor 
paralysis (bulbar paralysis). The incubation 
period may vary from a few hours to a week. 
The other symptoms include diplopia, 
dysphagia, dry mouth, dysphonia, dysarthria 
and pulmonary depression. The treatment 
includes intense supportive treatment and use 
of antitoxin. 

4. Shigella: The main clinical features are the 
abrupt onset of diarrhoea, sometimes 
bloody, and pus in stools. The incubation 
period is 1-3 days. The symptoms are due 
to enterotoxin and neurotoxin. The 
treatment includes use of antibiotics, and 
supportive treatment is required. 

5. Salmonella: This infection is also quite 
common and presents as typhoid, which is 
characterised by high grade fever, headache 
and myalgia. It is mainly due to the ingestion 


CFMT-41 (3rd Proof).p65 


322 


8/16/07, 11:09 AM 


















Food Poisoning 323 


of contaminated food like eggs, milk and 
meat. The initial symptoms may include 
watery diarrhoea stained with blood or 
mucus. The incubation period is 12-18 hours. 
The treatment includes use of antibiotics 
mainly chloramphenicol along with 
supportive treatment. 

6. Vibrio cholerae: This commonly manifests 
as explosive watery diarrhoea. It is a mainly 
water borne illness caused by drinking 
contaminated water, las si or cold drink. The 
incubation period is 1-3 days. It is due to 
enterotoxin produced by the bacteria. 
Treatment includes immediate replacement 
of electrolytes and use of antibiotics. This 
poisoning is quite common in big fairs. 

7. E. coli: Normally, it is a part of flora of the 
intestine but sometimes it causes diarrhoea. 
The incubation period is 1-3 days. 

8. Campylobacter: This organism usually 
grows in jejunum and is the most common 
cause of diarrhoea worldwide. The infection 
is due to ingestion of contaminated water, 
milk or meat. The clinical symptoms include 
watery or bloody diarrhoea along with fever. 
The disease is usually a self-limiting one. 

9. Traveller’s diarrhoea: It is seen among 
travellers. When a person visits another place, 
he suffers from abdominal discomfort, 
diarrhoea, fever and sometimes vomiting. 
The illness is self-limiting. 

Post-mortem Findings 

In most cases of bacterial food poisoning, the main 
feature is congestion present in the stomach and 
intestines. Ulceration may be seen. 

Medico-legal Significance 

Most of the bacterial food poisoning is accidental 
due to ingestion of contaminated food. Mass food 
poisoning cases are reported after ingestion of 
prasad in temples, or in weddings or in big fairs. 


POISONOUS FOOD 

Eating poisonous food also causes ill-effect. The 
common poisonous foods are: 

1. Lathyrus sativus: It is commonly called 
khesari dal and is a staple food among lower 
income groups in Madhya Pradesh, 
Chattisgarh and adjoining areas. The active 
neurotoxin is BOAA (B-N-Oxalyl 
aminoalanine) which is present in khesari 
dal. The clinical features are caused when 
consumption of dal exceeds 30 per cent of 
the total diet. The symptoms are spastic 
paralysis of lower limbs due to affection of 
pyramidal tracts by the toxin. In mild 
poisoning cases, there may be only mild 
muscular weakness in legs. The significant 
post-mortem finding is sclerosis of the 
lateral columns. 

2. Argemone mexicana: The common names 
are prickly poppy, or pila dhatura. This plant 
grows wildly all over India. The plant has 
spiny leaves, yellow flowers and prickly 
capsules containing small black seeds. 
These seeds resemble mustard seeds. Oil is 
extracted from these seeds and is used to 
adulterate mustard oil. The consumption of 
this oil can cause dropsy. The active 
principles in argemone oil are sanguinarine 
and dihydro sanguinarine. There have been 
many episodes of epidemic dropsy reported 
from various parts of India in the recent past. 
The clinical features of dropsy are vomiting, 
diarrhoea, pedal oedema, generalised 
anasarca, pleural effusion, pericardial 
effusion, hepatomegaly and congestive heart 
failure. Death may be caused due to 
myocardial damage. Breathlessness may be 
seen in some cases. 

Treatment is mainly supportive. Diuretics 
and steroids are used. 


CFMT-41 (3rd Proof).p65 


323 


8/16/07, 11:09 AM 


















324 Concise Textbook of Forensic Medicine and Toxicology 


MUSHROOM POISONING 

There are about 5,000 species of mushrooms. But 
only 50-100 are poisonous. Majority of the 
poisoning occurs due to ingestion of Amanita 
phalloides. 

Structure of a Mushroom 

A mushroom is made up of a cap, a stem, gills and 
spores which are on the gills. The vulva is the partial 
remnant of the veil found around the base of the stem 
in some species. The veil is a membrane that 
sometimes completely or partially covers the gills. 
The annulus is a ring-like structure that may surround 
the stem and is a remnant of the partial veil. 

Clinical Features 

Poisoning by mushroom is of the following two 
types: 

1. Short Incubation Poisoning 

It may be classified according to the species 
causing it: 

(a) Omphalotus species: Muscurine is the 
toxin contained in this group. It acts 
rapidly and affects autonomic system. 
The cholinergic symptoms like 
sweating, lacrimation, miosis, blurred 
vision, diarrhoea, abdominal cramps and 
bradycardia are reported. The symptoms 
appear in about 60 minutes and go 
within 24 hours. The treatment is 
supportive. Atropine may be given only 
in cases of severe poisoning. 

(b) Coprinus groups: This variety has a 
toxin called coprine and it inactivates the 
enzyme acetaldehyde dehydrogenase. It 
also produces autonomic features. It acts 
as an Antabuse and it produces side 
effects if alcohol is taken along with 
mushroom. The symptoms include 


nausea, vomiting, hypotension and 
paraesthesias. The treatment is 
supportive. Recovery occurs in 2-4 
hours. Alcohol should be avoided. 

2. Long Incubation Poisoning 

In this poisoning, the symptoms are produced only 
after 6-24 hours and include following variety of 
mushrooms: 

(a) Gyromitra group: It contains a toxin 
named monomethyl hydrazine. The 
clinical features are nausea and vomiting 
followed by muscle cramps, severe 
abdominal pain with severe diarrhoea. 
Diarrhoea may sometimes be bloody. 
Fever, liver failure, along with 
convulsions, coma and death may be 
seen in severe poisoning. The treatment 
is supportive and includes high dose of 
pyridoxine. 

(b) Amanita phalloides and Galerina 
group: This group contributes up to 95 
per cent of mushroom fatalities. 
Amatoxin and phallotoxin are the toxins 
present in mushrooms. They are 
thermostable. The main site of action is 
gastrointestinal tract, liver and renal 
tubules. Phallotoxin acts rapidly and 
affects gastrointestinal tract while 
amatoxin acts later (18-24 hours). There 
are three stages in the poisoning by A. 
phalloides. 

Stage I: Vomiting, profuse watery diarrhoea 
with severe abdominal pains. This stage lasts for 
24-36 hours. Severe dehydration and electrolyte 
loss may be seen. 

Stage U: Severe liver and renal damage is seen. 
It lasts for 12-24 hours. 

Stage III: Acute renal failure with hepatic 
necrosis causing hypoglycaemia, septic infection 
and death. If a pregnant woman takes A. phalloides, 
the child is not affected as amatoxin does not cross 
placental barrier. 


CFMT-41 (3rd Proof).p65 


324 


8/16/07, 11:09 AM 


















Food Poisoning 325 


Amanita muscaria 

It contains a toxin called ibotenic acid which acts 
very fast. The symptoms include dizziness, ataxia, 
muscle twitching and rarely hallucinations. The 
mushroom contains small amount of muscarine. 
The treatment is mainly supportive. 

Psilocybe Groups: The toxin has a structure 
like LSD. The clinical features are very rapid and 
include mood elevation and hallucinations. 
Symptoms remain for 6-10 hours. The treatment 
is mainly supportive. 

Treatment 

Gastric lavage is quite useful even lately as toxins 
are still found in duodenal aspirate even after a long 
time. Charcoal may be given later or after gastric 
lavage. In early admission, forced diuresis is very 
helpful. Some scientists have used thioctic acid with 
glucose solution with some success. Others doubt 
this. Plasma exchange is useful. Charcoal 


haemoperfusion is helpful. Rest of the treatment is 
supportive. Since toxins are secreted in breast milk, 
mothers should not be allowed to feed babies during 
treatment. 

Medico-legal Significance 

Mushroom poisoning is mostly accidental as there 
may be mixing of poisonous mushroom in the 
edible ones. The poisonous mushroom should be 
identified. The typical Amanita phalloides 
mushroom, also called ‘death cap’ has an olive 
green cap, white gills, a skirt-like ring on the stripe 
and a vulva. It should be distinguished by common 
edible variety of Amanita which is large, with an 
orange cap that is partially covered with a patch on 
top. Cases have been reported where mushrooms 
have been used as homicidal poisons too as A. 
phalloides has pleasant taste. It is a common belief 
that poisons are removed if mushrooms are boiled 
but this is not true. Poisonous mushrooms are rarely 
used for suicidal purposes. 


CFMT-41 (3rd Proof).p65 


325 


8/16/07, 11:09 AM 




















CFMT-41 (3rd Proof).p65 


326 


8/16/07, 11:09 AM 



APPENDICES 


Appendix 1.p65 


327 


8/12/07, 10:06 AM 




















Appendix 1.p65 


328 


8/12/07, 10:06 AM 



APPENDIX 

Common Features of Some 
Toxic Agents 


Table 1 Fatal doses and fatal periods of common toxic agents 



Poison 

Fatal dose 

Fatal period 

1 . 

Aspirin (acetyl salicylic acid) 

20-30 gm 

Few minutes to few hours 

2. 

Acid (minerals like sulphuric acid) 

10-15 ml 

18-24 hours 

3. 

Aconite root 

2 gm 

Few hours - 1 day 

4. 

Aluminum phosphide (celphos) 

1 tablet or 3 gm 

30 minutes - few hours 

5. 

Arsenic trioxide 

250 gm 

12-48 hours 

6. 

Atropine 

10 mg 

3-6 hours 

7. 

Long acting barbiturates 

6-10 gm 

Few hours 

8. 

Short acting barbiturates 

1-2 gm 

2-3 minutes 

9. 

Phenol (carbolic acid) 

20 ml 

3^1 hours 

10. 

Castor seeds (crushed) 

5-10 seeds 

1-2 days 

11. 

Cocaine 

1-2 gm 

5-30 minutes 

12. 

Copper sulphate 

30 gm 

1-2 days 

13. 

Curare 

60 mg 

Few hours 

14. 

Cyanide 

50-200 mg 

2-10 minutes 

15. 

Dhatura 

50-75 seeds 

24 hours 

16. 

DDT 

15-30 gm 

Few hours 

17. 

Diazinon 

1 gm 

Few hours 

18. 

Ethyl alcohol 

600-750 ml 

12-24 hours 

19. 

Ethylene glycol 

100 ml 

Few hours 

20. 

Formaldehyde 

30-60 ml 

Few hours 

21. 

Heroin 

50 mg 

Few minutes-30 minutes 

22. 

Iron 

200 mg/kg 

24-30 hours 

23. 

Isopropanol 

200-250 ml 

Variable on dose 

24. 

Lead acetate 

10 gm 

2-3 days 

25. 

Malathion 

1 gm 

Few hours 

26. 

Mercuric chloride 

1-2 gm 

3-5 days 

27. 

Methyl alcohol 

70-100 ml 

24-36 hours 

28. 

Morphine 

200 mg 

8-12 hours 


Contcl. 


Appendix 1.p65 


329 


8/12/07, 10:06 AM 





















330 Concise Textbook of Forensic Medicine and Toxicology 


Contd. Table 1 


Poison 

Fatal dose 

Fatal period 

29. 

Nicotine 

200 mg 

10-15 minutes 

30. 

Oleander 

5-15 leaves or 15 gm root 

Few hours-one day 

31. 

Opium 

500 mg 

Few hours 

32. 

Organochloro compounds 

2-6 gm 

4-6 hours 

33. 

Oxalic acid 

15-20 gm 

Variable 

34. 

Paracetamol 

12-20 gm 

Variable 12 hours-4 days 

35. 

Parathion 

100 mg 

Few hours 

36. 

White phosphorous 

60-120 mg 

4-40 hours 

37. 

Red phosphorous 

Non-toxic 

Not applicable 

38. 

Strychnine (one crushed seed) 

50-100 mg 

1-2 hour 

39. 

Thallium salt 

1 gm 

24-30 hours 

40. 

Croton seed 

1 seed 

12-24 hours 

41. 

Marking nut ( Semecarpus anacardium) 

5 gm 

12-24 hours 

42. 

Cantharides 

1-2 gm 

24-36 hours 

43. 

Snakes 

Cobra 

12 mg 

Few minutes 


Russell’s viper 

15 mg 

Few hours - few days 


Krait 

6 mg 

Few hours - few days 


Echis carinatus 

3 mg 

Few hours - few days 

44. 

Powdered glass 

Uncertain 

Uncertain 

45. 

Diamond powder 

Non-toxic 

Not applicable 

46. 

Diazepam (benzodiazepines) 

Non-toxic 

Not applicable 

47. 

Cannabis 

No fatality 

Not applicable 

48. 

Digitalis 

2-3 gm 

Few hours - one day 

49. 

Carbon monoxide 

80 per cent in air 

Rapid death 

50. 

Carbon dioxide 

60-80 per cent in air 

Rapid death 

51. 

Mushroom 

Variable depending 

Variable 



on variety 


Table 2 

Preferred solutions for gastric lavage for common poisons 



Poison 

Preferred solution for gastric lavage 

1 . 

Unknown poisoning or any 
poisoning if other solutions 
are not available 

Plain water or saline 


2. 

Cyanides 

Sodium thiosulphate (25 per cent concentration) 

3. 

Phenol (carbolic acid) 

Castor oil with warm water (1:2) 

4. 

Iron 

Desferrioxamine (2 gm in a 

litre of water) 

5. 

Oxalates 

Calcium gluconate 


6. 

Alkaloids and salicylates 

Potassium permanganate (1:5000) 


Appendix 1.p65 


330 


8/12/07, 10:06 AM 
























Appendix 1 331 


Table 3 Eye changes due to different poisons 


Eye change 

Poisons 

1. Nystagmus 

2. Mydriasis (dilatation of pupil) 

Alcohol, barbiturates, phencyclidine, phenytoin, carbamazepine 
Alcohol, amphetamines, carbon monoxide, anti-histaminic, cocaine, 
dhatura, ephedrine, atropine 

3. Miosis (constriction of pupils) 

Morphine and other opiates, barbiturates, benzodiazepines, caffeine, 
carbamates, phenol, nicotine, organophosphates, clonidine 


Appendix 1.p65 


331 


8/12/07, 10:06 AM 





















APPENDIX 

Relevant Sections of Law for 
Medical Practice 


INDIAN EVIDENCE ACT (ACT OF 1872) 

Sec. 113A: Presumption as to abetment of suicide 
by a married woman —When the question is 
whether the commission of suicide by a woman 
has been abetted by her husband or any relative of 
her husband and it is shown that she had committed 
suicide within a period of seven years from the date 
of her marriage, and that her husband or such 
relative of her husband had subjected her to cruelty, 
the Court may presume, having regard to all the 
other circumstances of the case, that such suicide 
had been abetted by her husband or by such relative 
of her husband. 

Explanation: For the putpose of this section, 
‘cruelty’, shall have the same meaning as in Sec. 
498A of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860). 

Sec. 114A: Presumption as to absence of 
consent in certain prosecutions for rape —In a 
prosecution for rape under Cl (a) or C1 (b) or C1 
(c) or Cl (d) or Cl (e) or Cl (g) of subsection (2) 
of Sec. 376 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860), 
where sexual intercourse by the accused is proved 
and the question is whether it was without the 
consent of the woman alleged to have been raped 
and she states in her evidence before the Court that 
she did not consent, the Court shall presume that 
she did not consent. 


THE CODE OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE, 1973 

Sec. 53: Examination of the accused by medical 
practitioner at the request of police officer — 

1. When a person is arrested on a charge of 
committing an offence of a nature and 
alleged to have been committed under such 
circumstances that there are reasonable 
grounds for believing that an examination 
of this person will afford evidence as to the 
commission of an offence, it shall be lawful 
for a registered medical practitioner acting 
at the request of a Police Officer not below 
the rank of Sub-Inspector and for any person 
acting in good faith in his aid and under his 
direction to make such an examination of 
the person arrested as is reasonably 
necessary in order to ascertain the facts 
which may afford such evidence and to use 
such force as is reasonably necessary for 
that purpose. 

2. Whenever the person of a female is to be 
examined under this section, the 
examination shall be made only by or under 
the supervision of a female registered 
Medical Practitioner. 


Appendix 2.p65 


332 


8/12/07, 9:47 AM 



















Appendix 2 333 


Sec. 54: Examination of arrested person by 
Medical Practitioner at the request of arrested 
person —When a person who is arrested, whether 
on a charge or otherwise, alleges at the time when 
he is produced before a Magistrate or at any time 
during the period of his detention in custody that 
the examination of his body will afford evidence 
which will disprove the commission by him of any 
offence or which will establish the commission by 
any other person of any offence against his body. 
The Magistrate shall, if requested by the arrested 
person to do so, direct the examination of the body 
of such person by a registered Medical Practitioner 
unless the Magistrate considers that the request is 
made for the puipose of vexation of delay or for 
defeating the end of justice. 

THE POWERS OF POLICE TO INVESTIGATE 

Sec. 154: Information in cognisable cases — 

1. Every information relating to the 
commission of a cognisable offence, if given 
orally to an officer in charge of a police 
station, shall be reduced to writing by him 
or under his direction, and be read over to 
the informant; and every such information, 
whether given in writing or reduced to 
writing as aforesaid shall be signed by the 
person giving it and the substance thereof 
shall be entered in a book to be kept by such 
officer in such form as the State Government 
may prescribe in this behalf. 

Sec. 174: Police to inquire and report on 
suicide, etc .— 

1. When the officer in charge of a police station, 
or some other police officer, specially 
empowered by the State Government in that 
behalf, receives information that a person has 
committed suicide, or has been killed by 
another or by an animal, or by machinery, or 
by an accident, or has died in circumstances 
raising a reasonable suspicion that some other 
person has committed an offence, he shall 


immediately give intimation thereof to the 
nearest Executive Magistrate empowered to 
hold inquests, and unless otherwise directed 
by any rule prescribed by the State 
Government or by any general or special 
order of the district or Sub-Divisional 
Magistrate, shall proceed to the place where 
the body of such deceased person is, and 
there in the presence of two or more 
respectable inhabitants of the neighbourhood, 
shall make an investigation and draw up a 
report of the apparent cause of death, 
describing such wounds, fractures, bruises 
and other marks of injury as may be found 
on the body and stating in what manner, or 
by what weapon or instrument (if any) such 
marks appear to have been inflicted. 

2. The report shall be signed by such police 
officer and other persons, or by so many of 
them, as concur herein, and shall be forthwith 
forwarded to the District Magistrate or the 
Sub-Divisional Magistrate. 

3. When there is any doubt regarding the cause 
of death, or when for any other reason the 
police-officer considers it expedient to do 
so, he shall, subject to such rules as the State 
Government may prescribe in this behalf, 
forward the body, with a view to its being 
examined to the nearest Civil Surgeon or 
other qualified medical man appointed in 
this behalf by the State Government, if the 
state of the weather and the distance admit 
of its being so forwarded without risk of 
such putrefaction on road as would render 
such examination useless. 

4. The following Magistrates are empowered 
to hold inquests, namely, any District 
Magistrate, Sub-Divisional Magistrate, or 
any other Executive Magistrate specially 
empowered in this behalf by the State 
Government or the District Magistrate. 

Amendment of Section 174 —In the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1973 (hereinafter referred to 


Appendix 2.p65 


333 


8/12/07, 9:47 AM 


















334 Concise Textbook of Forensic Medicine and Toxicology 


as the Code of Criminal Procedure) in Section 174, 
in sub-section (3), for the words “When there is 
any doubt regarding the cause of death, or when 
for any other reason the police officer considers it 
expedient so to do, he shall,” the following shall be 
substituted, namely “When—(i) the case involves 
suicide by a woman within seven years of her 
marriage; or (ii) the case relates to the death of a 
woman within seven years of her marriage in any 
circumstances raising a reasonable suspicion that 
some other person committed an offence in relation 
to such woman; or (iii) the case relates to the death 
of a woman within seven years of her marriage and 
any relative of the woman has made a request in 
this behalf; or (iv) there is any doubt regarding the 
cause of death; or (v) the police officer for any other 
reason consider expedient so to do, he shall.” 

Sec. 175: Power to summon persons — 

1. A police officer proceeding under Section 
174 by order in writing, summons two or 
more persons as aforesaid for the purpose 
of the said investigation and any other 
person who appears to be acquainted with 
the facts of the case. Every person so 
summoned shall be bound to attend and to 
answer truly all questions other than 
questions the answer to which would have 
a tendency to expose him to a criminal 
charge, or to a penalty or forfeiture. 

2. If the facts do not disclose a cognisable 
offence to which Section 170 applies, such 
persons shall not be required by the police 
officer to attend a Magistrate Court. 

Sec. 176: Inquiry by Magistrate into the cause 
of death — 

1. When any person dies while in the custody 
of the police, the nearest Magistrate 
empowered to hold inquests shall, and in 
any other case mentioned in sub-section (1) 
of Section 174 any Magistrate so 
empowered may, hold an inquiry into a 
cause of death either instead of, or in 
addition to the investigation held by the 


police officer, and if he does so, he shall 
have all the powers in conducting it which 
he would have in holding an inquiry into an 
offence. 

2. The Magistrate holding such an inquiry shall 
record the evidence taken by him in 
connection herewith in any of the manners 
hereinafter prescribed according to the 
circumstances of the case. 

3. Power to disinter corpses—whenever such 
Magistrate considers it expedient to make 
an examination of the dead body of any 
person who has already been interred in 
order to discover the cause of his death, the 
magistrate may cause the body to be 
disinterred and examined. 

4. When an enquiry is to be held under this 
section, the Magistrate shall, wherever 
possible, inform the relatives of the deceased 
whose names and addresses are known and 
shall allow them to remain present at the 
enquiry (Explanation—relatives mean, 
parents, children, brothers, sisters and 
spouse). 

Amendment of Section 175 —In Section 176 
of the Code of Criminal Procedure, in sub-section 
(1) for the words “When any person dies while in 
the custody of the police” the words, brackets and 
figures ‘when any person dies while in the custody 
of the police or when the case is of the nature 
referred to in clause (i) or clause (ii) of sub-section 
(8) of Section 174’ shall be substituted. 

Sec. 198(6): Prosecution of offence for marital 
misbehaviour —No Court shall take cognisance of 
an offence under Section 376 of the Indian Penal 
Code, where such offence consists of sexual 
intercourse by a man with his own wife, the wife 
being under fifteen years of age, if more than one 
year has elapsed from the date of the commission 
of the offence. 

Sec. 291: Deposition of medical witness — 

1. The deposition of a Civil Surgeon or other 
medical witness, taken and attested by a 


Appendix 2.p65 


334 


8/12/07, 9:47 AM 


















Appendix 2 335 


Magistrate in the presence of the accused, 
or taken on commission under this chapter, 
may be given in evidence in any inquiry, 
trial or other proceedings under this Code, 
although the deponent is not called a 
witness. 

2. The Court may, if it thinks fit, and shall on 
the application of the prosecution of the 
accused, summon and examine any such 
deponent as to the subject matter of his 
deposition. 

Sec. 293. Reports of certain government 
scientific experts — 

1. Any document purporting to be a report 
under the hand of a government scientific 
expert to whom this section applies, upon 
any matter or thing duly submitted to him 
for examination or analysis and report in the 
course of any proceeding under this Code, 
may be used as evidence in any inquiry, trial 
or other proceedings under this Code. 

2. The Court may, if it thinks fit, summon and 
examine any such expert as to the subject 
matter of his report. 

3. Where any such expert is summoned by a 
Court and he is unable to attend personally, 
he may, unless the Court has expressly 
directed him to appear personally, depute 
any responsible officer working with him 
to attend the Court, if such officer is 
conversant with the facts of the case and can 
satisfactorily depose in Court on his behalf. 

4. This section applies to the following 
Government scientific experts, namely: 

a. Any Chemical Examiner or Assistant 
Chemical Examiner to Government. 

b. The Chief Inspector of Explosives; 

c. The Director of the Finger Print Bureau; 

d. The Director, Haffkine Institute, 
Bombay; 

e. The Director*(Deputy Director or 
Assistant Director) of a Central Forensic 
Science Laboratory or a State Forensic 
Science Laboratory; 


f. The Serologist to the Government. 

Amendment of Section 327 — 

1. In the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 
(hereinafter referred to as the Criminal 
Procedure Code), Section 327 shall be 
renumbered as sub-section (1) of that 
section and after it, as so renumbered, the 
following sub-sections shall be inserted, 
namely— 

2. “Notwithstanding anything contained in 
sub-section (1), the inquiry into the trial of 
rape or an offence under Section 376, 
Section 376A, Section 376B, Section 376C 
or Section 376D of the Indian Penal Code 
shall be conducted in camera: 

Provided that the presiding judge may, if 
he thinks fit, or on an application made by 
either of the parties, allow any particular 
person to have access to, or remain in the 
room or building used by the court. 

3. Where any proceedings are held under sub¬ 
section (2), it shall not be lawful for any 
person to print or publish any matter in 
relation to any such proceedings, except 
with the previous permission of the court”. 

Sec. 366(1): Sentence of death to be submitted 
by Court of Session for confirmation — When the 
Court of Session passes sentence of death, the 
proceedings shall be submitted to the High Court, 
and the sentence shall not be executed unless it is 
confirmed by the High Court. 

Sec. 416( 1): Postponement of capital sentence 
on pregnant woman —If a woman sentenced to 
death is found to be pregnant, the High Court shall 
order the execution of the sentence to be postponed 
and may, if it thinks fit, commute the sentence to 
transportation for life. 

THE INDIAN PENAL CODE 

34. Act done by several persons in furtherance 
of common intention —When a criminal act 
is done by several persons, in furtherance 


Appendix 2.p65 


335 


8/12/07, 9:47 AM 


















336 Concise Textbook of Forensic Medicine and Toxicology 


of the common intention of all, each of such 
person is liable for that act in the same 
manner, as if it were done by him alone. 

44. Injury —The word “injury” denotes any hatm 
whatever illegally caused to any person in 
body, mind, reputation, or property. 

51. Oath —The word “oath” includes a solemn 
affirmation substituted by law for an oath, 
and declaration required or authorised by 
law to be made before a public servant or to 
be used for the putpose of proof, whether 
in a Court of Justice or not. 

52. Good faith —Nothing is said to be done or 
believed in good faith which is done or 
believed without due care and attention. 

53. Punishments —The punishments to which 
offenders are liable under the provisions of 
this Code are: 

Firstly —Death; Secondly —Imprisonment 
for life; Thirdly —Imprisonment, which is 
of two descriptions, namely: (1) Rigorous, 
that is, with hard labour, (2) Simple; 
Fourthly — Forfeiture of property; Fifthly — 
Fine; Sixthly — Detention in reformatories. 

80. Accident in doing a lawful act —Nothing is 
an offence which is done by accident or 
misfortune, and without any criminal 
intention or knowledge in the doing of a 
lawful act in the lawful manner by a lawful 
means and with proper care and caution. 

81. Act likely to cause harm, but done without 
criminal intent, and to prevent other harm — 
Nothing is an offence merely by reason of 
its being done with the knowledge that it is 
likely to cause harm, if it be done without 
any criminal intention to cause harm, and 
good faith for the purpose of preventing or 
avoiding other harm to person or property. 
Explanation: It is a question of fact in such 
a case whether the harm to be prevented or 
avoided was of such a nature and so 
imminent as to justify or excuse the risk or 
doing the act with the knowledge that it was 
likely to cause harm. 


82. Act of a child under seven years of age — 
Nothing is an offence which is done by a 
child under seven years of age. 

83. Act of a child above seven and under twelve 
of immature understanding —Nothing is an 
offence which is done by a child above 
seven years of age and under twelve, who 
has not attained sufficient maturity of 
understanding to judge the nature and 
consequences of his conduct on that 
occasion. 

84. Act of a person of unsound mind — Nothing 
is an offence which is done by a person who, 
at the time of doing it, by reason of 
unsoundness of mind, is incapable of 
knowing the nature of the act, or that he is 
doing what is either wrong or contrary to 
law. 

85. Act of a person incapable of judgement by 
reason of intoxication caused against his 
will — Nothing is an offence which is done 
by a person who, at the time of doing it, is 
by reason of intoxication, incapable of 
knowing the nature of the act, or that he is 
doing what is either wrong or contrary to 
law provided that the thing which 
intoxicated him was administered to him 
without his knowledge or against his will. 

86. Offence requiring a particular intent or 
knowledge committed by one who is 
intoxicated — In cases where an act done is 
not an offence unless done with a particular 
knowledge or intent, a person who does that 
act in a state of intoxication shall be liable 
to be dealt with as if he had the same 
knowledge as he would have had if he had 
not been intoxicated, unless the thing which 
intoxicated him was administered to him 
without his knowledge or against his will. 

87. Act not intended and not known to be likely 
to cause death or grievous hurt, done by 
consent —Nothing which is not intended to 
cause death, or grievous hurt, and which is 
not known by the doer to be likely to cause 
death or grievous hurt, is an offence by 


Appendix 2.p65 


336 


8/12/07, 9:47 AM 


















Appendix 2 337 


reason of any harm which it may cause, or 
be intended by the doer to cause, to any 
person, above eighteen years of age, who 
has given consent, whether expressed or 
implied, to suffer that harm; or by reason of 
any harm which it may be known by the 
doer to be likely to cause to any such person 
who has consented to take the risk of that 
harm. 

88. Act not intended to cause death, done by 
consent in good faith for person’s benefit — 
Nothing, which is not intended to cause 
death, is an offence by reason of any harm 
which it may cause, or be intended by the 
order to cause, or known by the order to be 
likely to cause, to any person for whose 
benefit it is done in good faith, and who has 
given consent, whether expressed or 
implied, to suffer that harm, or to take the 
risk of that harm. 

89. Act done in goodfaith for the benefit of child 
or insane person, by or by consent of 
guardian —Nothing which is done in good 
faith for the benefit of a person under twelve 
years of age, or of unsound mind, by or by 
consent, either expressed or implied, of the 
guardian or other person having lawful 
charge of that person, is an offence by 
reason of any harm which it may cause, or 
be intended by the doer to cause, or be 
known by the doer to be likely to cause, to 
that person: 

Provided: Firstly —That this exception shall 
not extend to the intentional causing of 
death, or to the attempting to cause death; 
Secondly — That this exception shall not 
extend to the doing of anything which the 
person doing it knows to be likely to cause 
death, for any purpose other than the 
preventing of death or grievous hurt or the 
curing of any grievous disease of infirmity; 
Thirdly —That this exception shall not 
extend to the voluntary causing of grievous 
hurt, or to the attempting to cause grievous 
hurt or the curing of any grievous disease 


or infirmity; Fourthly —that this exception 
shall not extend to the abetment of any 
offence, to the committing of which offence 
it would not extend. 

90. Consent known to be given under fear or 
misconception —A consent is not such a 
consent as is intended by any section of this 
Code, if the consent is given by a person 
under fear of injury, or under a 
misconception of fact, and if the person 
doing the act knows, or has reason to 
believe, that the consent was given in 
consequence of such fear or misconception; 
or if the consent given by a person who, 
from unsoundness of mind or intoxication, 
is unable to understand the nature and 
consequence of that to which he gives his 
consent; or unless the contrary appears from 
the context, if the consent is given by a 
person who is under twelve years of age. 

91. Exclusion of acts which are offences 
independently of harm caused —The 
exceptions in Sections 87, 88 and 89 do not 
extend to acts which are offences 
independently of any harm which they may 
cause or be intended to cause, or known to 
be likely to cause, to the person giving the 
consent or on whose behalf the consent is 
given. 

92. Act done in good faith for the benefit of a 
person without consent —Nothing is an 
offence by reason of any harm which it may 
cause to a person for whose benefit it is done 
in good faith, even without that person’s 
consent, if the circumstances are such that 
it is impossible for that person to signify 
consent or if that person is incapable of 
giving consent, and has no guardian or other 
person in lawful charge of him from whom 
it is possible to obtain consent in time for 
the thing to be done with benefit: Provided: 
Firstly —That this exception shall not extend 
to the intentional causing of death or the 
attempting to cause death; Secondly —That 


Appendix 2.p65 


337 


8/12/07, 9:47 AM 


















338 Concise Textbook of Forensic Medicine and Toxicology 


this exception, shall not extend to the doing 
of any thing which the person doing it 
knows to be likely to cause death for any 
purpose other than the preventing of death 
or grievous hurt or the curing of any 
grievous disease or infirmity; Thirdly —That 
this exception shall not extend to the 
voluntary causing of hurt, or the attempting 
to cause hurt, for any purpose other than 
the preventing of death or hurt; Fourthly — 
That this exception shall not extend to the 
abetment of any offence, to the committing 
of which offence it would not extend. 

197. Issuing or signing false certificate — 
Whoever issues or signs any certificate 
required by law to be given or signed, or 
relating to any fact of which such certificate 
is by law admissible in evidence, knowing 
or believing that such certificate is false in 
any material point, shall be punished in the 
same manner as if he gave false evidence. 

228A. Disclosure of Identity of the victim of certain 
offences, etc .— 

1. Whoever prints or publishes the name 
or any matter which may make known 
the identity of any person against whom 
an offence under Section 376, Section 
376A, Section 376B, Section 376C or 
Section 376D is alleged or found to have 
been committed (hereafter in this section 
referred to as the victim) shall be 
punished with imprisonment of either 
description for a term which may extend 
to two years and shall also be liable to 
fine. 

2. Nothing in sub-section (1) extends to 
any printing or publication of the name 
or any matter which may make known 
the identity of the victim if such printing 
or publication is— (a) by or under the 
order in writing of the officer-in-charge 
of the police station or the police officer 
making the investigation into such 
offence acting in good faith for the 


purposes of such investigation; or (b) by 
or with the authorisation in writing of 
the victim, or (c) where the victim is 
dead or minor or of unsound mind, by 
or with the authorisation in writing of 
the next of kin of the victim: 

Provided that no such authorisation shall 
be given by the next of kin to anybody 
other than the chairman or the secretary, 
by whatever name called, of any 
recognised welfare institution or 
organisation. 

Explanation —For the purposes of this 
subsection, “recognised welfare institution 
or organisation” means a social welfare 
institution or organisation recognised in this 
behalf by the Central or State Government. 

3. Whoever prints or publishes any matter in 
relation to any proceeding before a court 
with respect to an offence referred to in 
subsection (i) without the previous 
permission of such court shall be punished 
with imprisonment of either description for 
a term which may extend to two years and 
shall also be liable to fine. 

Explanation —The printing or publication 
of the judgement of any High Court or the 
Supreme Court does not amount to an 
offence within the meaning of this section. 

284. Negligent conduct with respect to poisonous 

substance —Whoever does, with any 
poisonous substance, any act in a manner 
so rash or negligent as to endanger human 
life, or to be likely to cause hurt or injury to 
any person, or knowingly or negligently 
omits to take such order, with any poisonous 
substance in his possession as is sufficient 
to guard against probable danger to human 
life from such poisonous substance shall be 
punished with imprisonment of either 
description for a term which may extend to 
six months, or with fine which may extend 
to one thousand rupees, or with both. 

299. Culpable homicide —Whoever causes death 

by doing an act with the intention of causing 


Appendix 2.p65 


338 


8/12/07, 9:47 AM 


















Appendix 2 339 


such bodily injury as is likely to cause death, 
or with the knowledge that he is likely by 
such act to cause death, commits the offence 
of culpable homicide. 

Explanation. 1—A person who causes injury 
to another who is labouring under a disorder, 
disease or bodily infirmity, and thereby accelerates 
the death of the other, shall be deemed to have 
caused this death. 

Explanation. 2—Where death is caused by 
bodily injury, the person who causes such bodily 
injury shall be deemed to have caused the death, 
although by resorting to proper remedies and skilful 
treatment the death might have been prevented. 

Explanation. 3 —The causing of the death of 
child in the mother’s womb is not homicide. But it 
may amount to culpable homicide to cause the death 
of a living child, if any part of that child has been 
brought forth, the child may not have breathed or 
been completely born. 

300. Murder —Except in the cases hereinafter 
excepted, culpable homicide is murder, if 
the act by which the death is caused is done 
with the intention of causing death, or 
Secondly —If it is done with the intention of 
causing such bodily injury as the offender knows 
to be likely to cause the death of the person; to 
whom the harm is caused, or 

Thirdly —If it is done with the intention of 
causing bodily injury to any person and the bodily 
injuries intended to be inflicted is sufficient in the 
ordinary course of nature to cause death, or 

Fourthly —If the person committing the act 
knows that it is so imminently dangerous that it 
must in all probability cause death or such bodily 
injury as is likely to cause death and commits such 
act without any excuse for incurring the risk of 
causing death or such injury as aforesaid. 

Exception 1—Culpable homicide is not murder 
if the offender whilst deprived of the power of self- 
control by grave and sudden provocation, causes 
the death of the person who gave the provocation 
or causes the death of other person by mistake or 
accident. 


The above exception is subject to the following 
provisos: 

Firstly —That the provocation is not sought or 
voluntarily provoked by the offender as an excuse 
for killing or doing harm to any person. 

Secondly —That the provocation is not given 
by anything done in obedience to the law or by a 
public servant in the lawful exercise of the powers 
of such public servant. 

Thirdly —That the provocation is not given by 
anything in the lawful exercise of the right of private 
defence. 

Explanation 1 —Whether the provocation was 
grave and sudden enough to prevent the offence 
from amounting to murder is a question of fact. 

Exception 2—Culpable homicide is not murder 
if the offender in the exercise in good faith of the 
right of private defence of person or property, 
exceeds the power given to him by law and causes 
the death of the person against whom he is exercising 
such right of defence without premeditation, and 
without any intention of doing more harm than is 
necessary for the purpose of such defence. 

Exception 3—Culpable homicide is not murder 
if the offender, being a public servant or aiding a 
public servant acting for the advancement of public 
justice, exceeds the powers given to him by law, 
and causes death by doing an act which he, in good 
faith, believes to be lawful and necessary for the 
due discharge of his duty as such public servant 
and without ill-will towards the person whose death 
is caused. 

Exception 4 —Culpable homicide is not murder 
if it is committed without premeditation in a sudden 
fight in the heat of passion upon a sudden quarrel 
and without the offender’s having taken undue 
advantage or acted in a cruel or unusual manner. 

Explanation —It is immaterial in such cases 
which party offers the provocation or commits the 
first assault. 

Exception 5 —Culpable homicide is not murder 
when the person whose death is caused, being 
above the age of eighteen years, suffers death or 
takes the risk of death with his own consent. 


Appendix 2.p65 


339 


8/12/07, 9:47 AM 


















340 Concise Textbook of Forensic Medicine and Toxicology 


301. Culpable homicide by causing death of 
person other than person whose death was 
intended —If a person, by doing anything 
which he intends or knows to be likely to 
cause death, commits culpable homicide by 
causing the death of any person, whose 
death he neither intends nor knows himself 
to be likely to cause, the culpable homicide 
committed by the officer is of the description 
of which it would have been if he had caused 
the death of the person whose death he 
intended or knew himself to be likely to 
cause. 

302. Punishment for murder —Whoever commits 
murder shall be punished with death, or 
transportation for life, and shall also be 
liable to fine. 

303. Punishment for murder by life convict — 
Whoever, being under sentence of 
transportation for life, commits murder, 
shall be punished with death. 

304. Punishment for culpable homicide not 
amounting to murder —Whoever commits 
culpable homicide not amounting to murder, 
shall be punished with imprisonment for 
life, or imprisonment of either description 
for a teim which may extend to ten years, 
and shall also be liable to fine if the act by 
which the death is caused is done with the 
intention of causing death, or of causing 
such bodily injury as is likely to cause death; 
or with imprisonment of either description 
for a teim which may extend to ten years, 
or with fine, or with both, if the act is done 
with the knowledge that it is likely to cause 
death but without any intention to cause 
death or to cause such bodily injury as is 
likely to cause death. 

304A. Causing death by negligence — Whoever 
causes the death of any person by doing any 
rash or negligent act not amounting to 
culpable homicide shall be punished with 
imprisonment of either description for a 
term which may extend to two years, or with 
fine or with both. 


305. Abetment of suicide of child or insane 
person —If any person under eighteen years 
of age, any insane person, any delirious 
person, any idiot, or any person in a state of 
intoxication commits suicide, whoever abets 
the commission of such suicide shall be 
punished with death or transportation for 
life, or imprisonment for a term not 
exceeding ten years, and shall also be liable 
to fine. 

306. Abetment of suicide —If any person commits 
suicide, whoever abets the commission of 
such suicide shall be punished with 
imprisonment of either description for a 
term which may extend to ten years, and 
shall also be liable to fine. 

307. Attempt to murder —Whoever does any act 
with such intention or knowledge and under 
such circumstances that if he by that act 
caused death, he would be guilty of murder, 
shall be punished with imprisonment of 
either description for a term which may 
extend to ten years, and shall also be liable 
to fine: and if hurt is caused to any person 
by such act the offender shall be liable either 
to imprisonment for life, or to such 
punishment as is hereinbefore mentioned. 
When any person offending under this 
section is under sentence of imprisonment 
for life, he may, if hurt is caused, be 
punished with death. 

308. Attempt to commit culpable homicide — 
Whoever does any act with such intention 
or knowledge, and under such 
circumstances that if he by that act caused 
death, he would be guilty of culpable 
homicide not amounting to murder, shall be 
punished with imprisonment of either 
description for a term which may extend to 
three years or with fine, or with both; and if 
hurt is caused to any person by such act, 
shall be punished with imprisonment of 
either description for a term which may 
extend to seven years, or with fine, or with 
both. 


Appendix 2.p65 


340 


8/12/07, 9:47 AM 


















Appendix 2 341 


309. Attempt to commit suicide —Whoever 
attempts to commit suicide and does any act 
toward the commission of such offence, 
shall be punished with simple imprisonment 
for a term which may extend to one year, or 
with fine, or with both. 

312. Causing miscarriage —Whoever voluntarily 
causes a woman with child to miscarry shall, 
if such miscarriage be not caused in good 
faith for the purpose of saving the life of the 
woman, be punished with imprisonment of 
either description or a term which may 
extend to three years, or with both, and if 
the woman be quick with child, shall be 
punished with imprisonment of either 
description for a term which may extend 
to seven years, and shall also be liable to 
fine. 

Explanation —A woman, who causes 
herself to miscarry, is within the meaning 
of this section. 

Note: “With child” means pregnant and it is 
not necessary to show that quickening, that is 
perception by the mother of the movements of the 
foetus has taken place or that the embryo has 
assumed a foetal form. The stage to which 
pregnancy has advanced and the form which ovum 
or embryo may have assumed are immaterial. 

“Quick with child ”—When the woman has felt 
that child moves within her. 

313. Causing miscarriage without woman’s 
consent —Whoever commits the offence 
defined in the last preceding section without 
the consent of the woman, whether the 
woman is quick with child or not, shall be 
punished with transportation for life, or with 
imprisonment of either description for a 
term which may extend to ten years, and 
shall also be liable to fine. 

314. Death caused by act done with intent to 
cause miscarriage —Whoever, with intent 
to cause the miscarriage of a woman with 
child, does any act which causes the death 
of such woman, shall be punished with 


imprisonment of either description for term 
which may extend to ten years and shall also 
be liable to fine, and if the act is done 
without the consent of the woman, shall be 
punished either with transportation for life, 
or with the punishment above mentioned. 

Explanation —It is not essential to this 
offence that the offender should know that 
the act is likely to cause death. 

315. Act done with intent to prevent child being 
born alive or to cause it to die after birth — 
Whoever before the birth of any child does 
any act with the intention of thereby 
preventing that child from being born alive 
or causing it die after its birth, and does by 
such act prevent that child from being born 
alive or causes it to die after its birth, shall, 
if such act be not caused in good faith for 
the purpose of saving the life of the mother, 
be punished with imprisonment of either 
description for a term which may extend to 
ten years, or with fine or with both. 

316. Causing death of quick unborn child by act 
amounting to culpable homicide —Whoever 
does any act under such circumstances, that 
if he thereby caused death, he would be guilty 
of culpable homicide and does by such act 
cause the death of a quick unborn child, shall 
be punished with imprisonment of either 
description for a term which may extend to 
ten years and shall also be liable to fine. 

317. Exposure and abandonmen t of child under 
twelve years by parent or person having 
care of it —Whoever being the father or 
mother of a child under the age of twelve 
years, or having the care of such child shall 
expose or leave such child in any place with 
the intention of wholly abandoning for a 
term which may extend to seven years, or 
fine or with both. 

Explanation —This section is not 
intended to prevent the trial of the offender 
for murder or culpable homicide, as the case 
may be, if the child dies in consequence of 
the exposer. 


Appendix 2.p65 


341 


8/12/07, 9:47 AM 


















342 Concise Textbook of Forensic Medicine and Toxicology 


318. Concealment of birth by secret disposal of 
dead body —Whoever, by secretly burying 
or otherwise disposing of the dead body of 
a child, whether such child dies before or 
after or during its birth, intentionally 
conceals or endeavours to conceal the birth 
of such child, shall be punished with 
imprisonment of either description for a 
term which may extend to two years, or with 
fine, or with both. 

321. Voluntarily causing hurt —Whoever does 
any act with the intention of thereby causing 
hurt to any person, with the knowledge that 
he is likely thereby to cause hurt to any 
person, and does thereby cause hurt to any 
person is said “voluntarily to cause hurt”. 

322. Voluntarily causing grievous hurt — 
Whoever voluntarily causes hurt if the hurt 
which he intends to cause or knows himself 
to be likely to cause is grievous hurt, and if 
the hurt which he causes is grievous hurt, is 
said “voluntarily to cause grievous hurt”. 

Explanation —A person is not said 
voluntarily to cause grievous hurt, except 
when he both causes grievous hurt and 
intends or knows himself to be likely to 
cause grievous hurt. But he is said 
voluntarily to cause grievous hurt if, 
intending or knowing himself to be likely 
to cause grievous hurt of one kind, he 
actually causes grievous hurt of another 
kind. 

323. Punishment for voluntarily causing hurt — 
Whoever, except in the case provided for 
by Section 334, voluntarily causes hurt, shall 
be punished with imprisonment of either 
description for a term which may extend to 
one year, or with fine which may extend to 
one thousand rupees or with both. 

324. Voluntarily causing hurt by dangerous 
weapons or means —Whoever, except in the 
case provided for by Section 334, 
voluntarily causes hurt by means of any 
instrument for shooting, stabbing or cutting 


or any instrument which used as a weapon 
of offence is likely to cause death or by 
means of fire or any heated substance or by 
means of any poison or any corrosive 
substance, or by means of any explosive 
substance, or by means of any substance 
which is deleterious to the human body to 
inhale, to swallow, or to receive into the 
blood, or by means of any animal, shall be 
punished with imprisonment of either 
description for a term which may extend to 
three years or with fine or both. 

325. Punishment for voluntarily causing grievous 
hurt —Whoever except in the case provided 
for by Section 335, voluntarily causes 
grievous hurt shall be punished with 
imprisonment of either description for a 
term which may extend to seven years and 
shall also be liable to fine. 

326. Voluntarily causing grievous hurt by 
dangerous weapons or means —Whoever, 
except in the case provided for by Section 
335, voluntarily causes grievous hurt by 
means of any instrument for shooting, 
stabbing or cutting or any instrument which 
is used as a weapon of offence is likely to 
cause death or by means of fire or any heated 
substance or by means of any poison or any 
corrosive substance or by means of any 
explosive substance, which is deleterious to 
the body to inhale, to swallow or to receive 
into the blood or by means of any animal 
shall be punished with transportation for life 
or with imprisonment of either description 
for a term which may extend to ten years 
and shall also be liable to fine. 

328. Causing hurt by means of poison, etc., with 
intent to commit an offence —Whoever 
administers to or causes to be taken by any 
person any poison or any stupefying 
intoxicating or unwholesome drug or other 
thing with intent to cause hurt to such person 
with intent to commit or to facilitate the 
commission of an offence, or knowing it to 


Appendix 2.p65 


342 


8/12/07, 9:47 AM 


















Appendix 2 343 


be likely that he will thereby cause hurt, 
shall be punished with imprisonment of 
either description for a term which may 
extend to ten years and shall also be liable 
to fine. 

352. Assault —Whoever makes any gesture or 
any preparation, intending or knowing it to 
be likely that such gesture or preparation 
will cause any person present to apprehend 
that he who makes that gesture or 
preparation is about to use criminal force to 
that person, is said to commit an assault. 
Explanation —Mere words do not amount 
to an assault. But the words which a person 
uses may give to his gestures or preparations 
such a meaning as may make those gestures 
or preparations amount to an assault. 

354. Assault or criminal force to woman with 
intent to outrage her modesty —Whoever 
assaults or uses criminal force to any woman 
intending to outrage or knowing it to be 
likely that he will thereby outrage her 
modesty, shall be punished with 
imprisonment of either description for a 
term which may extend to two years or with 
fine or with both. 

366. Kidnapping or abducting woman to compel 
her for marriage —Whoever kidnaps or 
abducts any woman with intent that she may 
be compelled or knowing it to be likely that 
she will be compelled to marry any person 
against her will or order, that she may be 
forced or seduced to illicit intercourse, shall 
be punished with imprisonment of either 
description for a term which may extend to 
ten years and shall also be liable to fine. 

Substitution of New Sections for Sections 
375 and 376 

In the Penal Code, for the heading “Of Rape” 
occurring immediately before Section 375 and for 
Sections 375 and 376, the following heading and 
Sections shall be substituted, namely— 


‘Sexual Offences’ 

375. Rape —A man is said to commit “rape” who, 

except in the case hereinafter excepted, has 
sexual intercourse with a woman under 
circumstances falling under: 

Firstly —Against her will. 

Secondly —Without her consent. 

Thirdly —With her consent, when her consent 
has been obtained by putting her (or any person in 
whom she is interested) in fear of death or of hurt. 

Fourthly —With her consent when the man 
knows that he is not her husband, and that her 
consent is given because she believes that he is 
another man to whom she is, or believes, herself to 
be lawfully married. 

Fifthly —With her consent, when at the time 
of giving such consent, by reason of unsoundness 
of mind or intoxication or the administration by 
him personally or through another of any stupefying 
or unwholesome substance, she is unable to 
understand the nature and consequences of that to 
which she gives consent. 

Sixthly —With or without her consent when she 
is under sixteen years of age. 

Explanation —Penetration is sufficient to 
constitute the sexual intercourse necessary to the 
offence or rape. 

Exception —Sexual intercourse by a man with 
his own wife, the wife not being under fifteen years 
of age is not rape. 

376. Punishment for rape — 

1. Whoever, except in the cases provided for 
by sub-section (2), commits rape, shall be 
punished with imprisonment of either 
description for a term which shall not be 
less than seven years but which may be for 
a life or for a term which may extend to ten 
years and shall also be liable to fine unless 
the woman raped is his own wife and is not 
under twelve years of age, in which case, 
he shall be punished with imprisonment of 
either description for a term which may 
extend to two years or with fine or with both: 


Appendix 2.p65 


343 


8/12/07, 9:47 AM 


















344 Concise Textbook of Forensic Medicine and Toxicology 


2. Whoever 

(a) being a police officer commits rape— 

(i) within the limits of the police station 
to which he is appointed; or 

(ii) in the premises of any station house 
whether or not situated in the police 
station to which he is appointed; or 

(iii) on a woman in his custody or in the 
custody of a police officer 
subordinate to him; or 

(b) being a public servant, takes advantage 
of his official position and commits rape 
on a woman in his custody as such 
public servant or in the custody of a 
public servant subordinate to him; or 

(c) being on the management or on the staff 
of a jail, remand home or other place of 
custody established by or under any law 
for the time being in force or of a 
women’s or children’s institution takes 
advantage of his official position and 
commits rape on any inmate of such jail, 
remand home, place or institution; or 

(d) being on the management of the staff of 
a hospital, takes advantage of his official 
position and commits rape on a woman 
in that hospital; or 

(e) commits rape on a woman knowing her 
to be pregnant; or 

(f) commits rape on a woman when she is 
under twelve years of age; or 

(g) commits gang rape, shall be punished 
with rigorous imprisonment for a term 
which shall not be less than ten years 
but which may be for life and shall also 
be liable to fine: 

Provided that the court may, for 
adequate and special reasons to be 
mentioned in the judgement, impose a 
sentence of imprisonment of either 
description for a term of less than ten 
years or with fine. 

Explanation 1—Where a woman is raped by 
one or more in a group of persons acting in 


furtherance of their common intention, each of the 
persons shall be deemed to have committed gang 
rape within the meaning of this sub-section. 

Explanation 2 —’’Women’s or children’s 
institution” means an institution, whether called an 
orphanage or a home for neglected women or 
children or a widow’s home or by any other name, 
which is established and maintained for the 
reception and care of women or children. 

Explanation 3—“Hospital” means the 
precincts of the hospital and includes the precincts 
of any institution for the reception and treatment 
of persons during convalescence or of persons 
requiring medical attention or rehabilitation. 

376A. Intercourse by a man with his wife during 
separation —Whoever has sexual 
intercourse with his own wife, who is living 
separately from him under a decree of 
separation or under any custom or usage 
without her consent shall be punished with 
imprisonment of either description for a 
term which may extend to two years and 
shall also be liable to fine. 

376B. Intercourse by public servant with woman 
in his custody —Whoever, being a public 
servant, takes advantage of his official 
position and induces or seduces any woman, 
who is in his custody as such public servant 
or in the custody of a public servant 
subordinate to him, to have sexual 
intercourse not amounting to the offence of 
rape, shall be punished with imprisonment 
of either description for a term which may 
extend to five years and shall also be liable 
to fine. 

376C. Intercourse by superintendent of jail, 
remand home, etc —Whoever being the 
superintendent or manager of a jail, remand 
home or other place of custody established 
by or under any law for the time being in 
force or of a women’s or children’s 
institution takes advantage of his official 
position and induces or seduces any female 
inmate of such jail, remand home, place or 


Appendix 2.p65 


344 


8/12/07, 9:47 AM 


















Appendix 2 345 


institution to have sexual intercourse with 
him, such sexual intercourse not amounting 
to the offence of rape, shall be punished with 
imprisonment of either description for a 
term which may extend to five years and 
shall also be liable to fine. 

376D. Intercourse by any member of the 
management or staff of a hospital with any 
woman in that hospital —Whoever, being on 
the management of a hospital or being on 
the staff of a hospital, takes advantage of 
his position and has sexual intercourse with 
any woman in that hospital, such sexual 
intercourse not amounting to the offence of 
rape, shall be punished with imprisonment 
of either description for a term which may 
extend to five years and shall also be liable 
to fine. 

Explanation —The expression “hospital” shall 
have the same meaning as in Explanation 3 to sub¬ 
section (2) of Section 376. 

377. Unnatural offences —Whoever voluntarily 
has carnal intercourse against the order of 
nature with any man, woman, or animal, 
shall be punished with transportation for 
life, or with imprisonment of either 
description for a term which may extend to 


ten years, and shall also be liable to fine. 

Explanation —Penetration is sufficient to 
constitute the carnal intercourse necessary to the 
offence described in this Section. 

Of Cruelty by Husband or Relatives of 
Husband 

498 A. Husband or relative of husband of a woman 
subjecting her to cruelty —Whoever, being 
the husband or the relative of the husband 
of a woman, subjects such woman to cruelty, 
shall be punished with imprisonment for a 
term which may extend to three years and 
shall also be liable to fine. 

Explanation —For the purposes of this section, 
“cruelty” means— 

(a) any wilful conduct which is such a nature 
(whether mental or physical) of the woman; 
or 

(b) harassment of the woman where such 
harassment is with a view to coercing her 
or any person related to her to meet any 
unlawful demand for any property or 
valuable security or is on account of failure 
by her or any person related to her to meet 
such demand. 


Appendix 2.p65 


345 


8/12/07, 9:47 AM 




















Appendix 2.p65 


346 


8/12/07, 9:47 AM 



Index 


A 

Abortion, 144 

classification of, 144 
criminal abortion, 145 
induced abortion, 144 
natural abortion, 144 
therapeutic abortion, 144 
complications of 
immediate, 146 
late, 146 

methods of inducing abortion under MTP Act 
medical method, 146 
other methods, 146 
surgical methods, 146 
Abrasions, 78 

age changes in, 79 
ante-mortem and post-mortem, 79 
grazes, 78 

imprint abrasion, 78 
medico-legal importance, 77 
pressure abrasion, 78 
scratches, 78 

Acetoaminophen poisoning, 241 
management, 242 
mechanism of toxicity, 242 
medico-legal significance, 242 
symptoms, 241 
Acetyl salicylic acid, 241 
fatal dose, 241 
fatal period, 241 
medico-legal significance, 241 
post-mortem appearance, 241 
symptoms, 241 
treatment, 241 


Aconite (mitha zahar), 312 
fatal dose, 313 
fatal period, 313 
Indian species of aconite, 313 
Mechanism of action, 313 
Medico-legal significance, 314 
Post-mortem appearance, 314 
symptoms, 313 
treatment, 313 
Act of commission, 217 
Act of omission, 217 

Acute poisoning by arseniuretted hydrogen, 261 
chemical tests of arsenic, 262 
Gutzeit test, 263 
Marsh’s test, 263 
Reinsch’s test, 262 
chronic poisoning, 261 
diagnosis, 261 
fatal dose, 261 
fatal period, 261 

medico-legal significance of arsenic 
poisoning, 263 

organic compounds of arsenic, 260 
post-mortem findings, 261 
symptoms, 262 
treatment, 261, 262 
Adipocere, 49 
Age, 14 

medico-legal importance, 16 
attainment of maturity, 18 
consent, 17 
criminal abortion, 18 
criminal responsibility, 16 
employment, 17 


Sharma-lndex.p65 


347 


8/27/07, 11:52 AM 


















348 Index 


evidence, 18 

impotence and sterility, 18 
infanticide, 18 
juvenile punishment, 17 
kidnapping, 17 
marriage contract, 18 
rape, 17 

Alcohol (ethyl alcohol), 289 
acute poisoning, 289 
alcohol and accidents, 294 
alcohol and sex, 294 
breath analysers, 294 
chronic poisoning, 290 
alimentary canal, 291 
blood, 291 

cardiovascular system, 291 
central nervous system, 291 
delirium Tremens, 291 
endocrine system, 291 
liver, 291 

neuropsychiatric complications, 291 
pancreas, 291 
respiratory system, 291 
skeletal muscle, 291 
Wernicke-Korsakoff syndrome, 291 
clinical symptoms, 289 
fatal dose, 290 
fatal period, 290 
medico-legal significance, 293 
pharmacokinetics of alcohol, 292 
post-mortem appearance, 290, 292 
treatment, 290 

treatment of chronic alcoholic addiction, 291 
antabuse therapy, 292 
supportive psychotherapy, 292 
withdrawal systems, 291 
Widmark formulae, 294 
Alkalies, 243 

mechanism of action, 243 
Alleged weapon of offence, 84 
Ammonia, 243 
Ammonium carbonate, 244 
Amphetamine, 304 
acute poisoning, 304 
chronic poisoning, 304 
fatal dose, 304 

medico-legal significance, 304 
treatment, 304 


Ante-mortem burns vs post-mortem burns 
line of redness, 72 
reparative process, 73 
vesication, 72 
Anthropometry, 18 
Antidotes, use of 
chemical, 236 
mechanical, 235 
physiological, 236 
specific receptor antagonist, 236 
Arsenic, 259 

acute poisoning, 260 
inorganic compounds of arsenic, 259 
arsenates, 259 
arsenic trioxide, 259 
arsenites, 259 

arseniuretted hydrogen, 260 
potassium arsenite, sodium arsenites, 259 
metallic arsenic, 259 
organic compounds of arsenic, 260 
sub-acute poisoning, 260 
Artefacts 

due to decomposition, 52 
due to environment 

post-mortem burning, 53 
post-mortem corrosion, 53 
post-mortem maceration, 53 
due to various other reasons, 53 
third party artefacts 

artefacts due to embalming, 53 
artefacts during post-mortem examination, 53 
deliberate mutilation, 53 
Artificial insemination 

indications for donor, 113 
indications for homologous, 113 
legal issues 
adultery, 114 
future complications, 114 
legal suits, 114 
legality, 114 

nullity of marriage and divorce, 114 
medico-legal significance, 113 
procedure, 113 
Aschheim-Zondek test, 121 
Asphyxial deaths, 54 
Asphyxiants (irrespirable gases), 317 
Assisted suicide, 163 

medico-legal significance, 163 


Sharma-lndex.p65 


348 


8/27/07, 11:52 AM 


















Index 349 


Atropa belladona, 300 
fatal dose, 301 
fatal period, 301 
medico-legal significance, 301 
symptoms, 300 

B 

Bacterial food poisoning, 322 
medico-legal significance, 323 
organisms 

Bacillus cereus, 322 
Campylobacter, 323 
Clostridium botulinum, 322 
E. coli, 323 
Salmonella, 322 
Shigella, 322 
Styphylococcus, 322 
Traveller’s diarrhoea, 323 
Vibrio cholerae, 323 
post-mortem findings, 323 
Barberio’s test, 35 
Barbiturates, 296 

chronic poisoning, 297 
clinical features, 297 
diagnosis, 297 
fatal dose, 297 
medico-legal points, 298 
pharmacokinetics, 296 
post-mortem appearance, 298 
treatment, 297 
Benzodiazepines, 298 
acute poisoning, 298 
chronic poisoning, 298 
medico-legal points, 298 
treatment, 298 

Biological stains and hair, examination of 
medico-legal importance, 32 
method 

age of stain, 34 

confirmatory test for blood, 34 
examination of blood, 32 
examination of blood stain, 33 
species identification, 34 
Blank cartridge, 88 
Bomb blast injuries, 90 
asphyxia, 90 
blast lung, 90 
burns, 90 


disruptive effect, 90 
falling masonary, 90 
flying missiles, 90 
post-mortem examination 
clothing, 91 
identification, 91 
injuries, 91 
shock wave, 90 

Brain death, Indian criteria of, 43 
Brain mapping or brain finger printing, 223 
Bruises or contusions 
age of bruise, 77 
medico-legal importance, 78 
severity of bruises, 77 
Bullet embolism, 88 
Burns 

causes of death 

Immediate causes, 70 
Late causes, 71 
classification of 

Dupuytren’s classification, 69 
Heba’s classifications, 69 
definitions, 69 
effects of burns 
age, 70 
duration, 70 

extent of area involved, 70 
intensity of heat, 70 
sex, 70 
site, 70 

fatal period, 71 
medico-legal significance, 72 
post-mortem findings 
external, 71 
internal, 72 

C 

Caffey’s syndrome, 142 

Calotropis gigantea and C. procera (Madar), 250 
fatal dose, 250 
fatal period, 250 
medico-legal significance, 250 
symptoms, 250 
treatment, 250 
Cannabis sativa, 301 
chronic poisoning, 302 
fatal dose, 302 
fatal period, 302 


Sharma-lndex.p65 


349 


8/27/07, 11:52 AM 


















350 Index 


medico-legal significance, 302 
post-mortem appearance, 302 
run-amok, 302 
symptoms, 301 
treatment, 302 
Cantharides, 275 
fatal dose, 275 
fatal period, 275 
medico-legal significance, 275 
post-mortem appearance, 275 
symptoms, 275 
treatment, 275 

Capsicum annuum (Red chillies), 249 
medico-legal significance, 249 
symptoms, 249 
Carbolic acid, poisoning, 239 
fatal dose, 240 
fatal period, 240 
medico-legal significance, 240 
post-mortem appearance, 240 
symptoms, 240 
treatment, 240 
Carbon dioxide, 317 

mechanism of action, 317 
medico-legal significance, 318 
post-mortem appearance, 317 
symptoms, 317 
treatment, 317 
Carbon monoxide, 318 
chronic poisoning, 319 
delayed clinical features, 319 
intoxication during pregnancy, 319 
laboratory diagnosis, 319 
mechanism of toxicity, 318 
medico-legal significance, 320 
post-mortem appearance, 320 
sources of exposure, 318 
spot test, 319 

sub-acute clinical features, 319 
symptoms, 318 
treatment, 319 
Cardiac poisons, 310 
Cerbera thevetia (Yellow oleander), 312 
fatal dose, 312 
fatal period, 312 
medico-legal significance, 312 
symptoms, 312 
treatment, 312 


Cerebral contusions, 106 
Cerebral lacerations, 106 

intra-cerebral haemorrhages, 107 
punch drunkenness or goofy, 107 
Cerebral injuries 
direct cause, 105 
indirect cause, 106 

Cerebral poisons—Deliriant poisons, 299 
Cerebral poisons—Inebriant poisons, 289 
Charak oath, 184 
Chloral hydrate, 296 

medico-legal significance, 296 
metabolism, 296 
physical features, 296 
symptoms, 296 
treatment, 296 
Chlorine, 242 

clinical features, 242 
fatal dose, 242 
mechanism of action, 242 
medico-legal significance, 242 
post-mortem features, 242 
treatment, 242 
Chopped animal hairs, 284 
Cloning, 166 
risks of, 167 
therapeutic, 167 
uses of, 167 
Cocaine, 302 

acute poisoning, 302 
chronic poisoning, 303 
symptoms, 303 
treatment, 303 

medico-legal significance, 303 
Code of medical ethics, 184 
Codeine, 286 
Cold, 66 

effect of, 66 

post-mortem findings, 67 
external, 67 
internal, 67 

medico-legal importance, 67 
treatment of, 67 
Colliquative putrefaction, 49 
factors affecting 
external, 49 
internal, 49 

Colocynth (Bitter apple/indrayani), 251 


Sharma-lndex.p65 


350 


8/27/07, 11:52 AM 


















Index 351 


fatal dose and fatal period, 251 
medico-legal significance, 251 
symptoms, 251 
treatment, 251 
Concealed sex, 13 

Concussion of the brain (Commotio cerebri), 106 
Conduct and duties in the witness box, 10 
Conium maculatum (Hemlock), 308 
fatal dose, 309 
fatal period, 309 
medico-legal significance, 309 
symptoms, 309 
treatment, 309 
Consent, 180 
express, 180 
implied, 180 
informed, 180 

Consumer protection act and medical 
profession, 220 
Contributory negligence, 217 
Copper, 267 

acute poisoning, 267 
fatal dose, 267 
fatal period, 267 
treatment, 267 
chronic poisoning, 267 
symptoms, 267 
treatment, 268 

medico-legal significance, 268 
post-mortem appearance, 267 
Corporate negligence, 218 
Corpus delicti, 11 
Corrosive poisoning, 237 
Court procedure, 8 
cross-examination, 8 
examination-in-chief, 8 
oath, 8 

questions put by judge, 8 
re-examination, 8 
Courts in India, 6 
High court, 6 
Magistrate courts, 7 
Sessions court, 6 
Supreme court, 6 
Criminal abortion 
causes of death 
air-embolism, 147 
haemorrhage, 147 


immediate, 147 
late, 147 
sepsis, 147 
sterility, 148 
vasovagal shock, 147 
medico-legal significance, 148 
Criminal abortion, methods to induce 
drugs 

abortion pills, 147 
emmenagogues, 147 
irritants, 147 
systemic poisons, 147 
unskilled abortion, 147 
violence 

general, 147 
local, 147 

Croton tiglium (Croton, Jamalgota), 246 
detection of seeds, 246 
fatal dose, 246 
fatal period, 246 
medico-legal significance, 247 
post-mortem appearance, 246 
symptoms, 246 
treatment, 246 
Curare, 308 

fatal dose, 308 
fatal period, 308 
medico-legal significance, 308 
symptoms, 308 
treatment, 308 
Custodial deaths, 164 
Cyanide (Hydrogen cyanide, HCN), 314 
chronic poisoning, 315 
fatal dose, 315 
fatal period, 315 
mechanism of action, 314 
medico-legal significance, 316 
post-mortem appearance, 315 
symptoms, 314 
treatment, 315 

D 

Dactylography 
foot prints, 20 
poroscopy, 19 

technique of investigating fingerprints, 19 
Deadborn 

maceration, 138 
mummification, 139 


Sharma-lndex.p65 


351 


8/27/07, 11:52 AM 


















352 Index 


Death, modes of 
asphyxia 

clinical features, 39 
coma, 38 
syncope, 38 
Death, signs of 
early 

changes in eye, 42 
changes in skin, 42 
cooling of body, 42 
post-mortem staining, 42 
immediate 

permanent cessation of circulation and 
respiration, 42 

late 

adipocere, 42 
mummification, 42 
putrefaction, 42 
rigor mortis, 42 
Definition of toxicology, 229 
classification of, 230 
emergency management, 233 
fonn, 232 
quantity, 232 

factors modifying action of 
condition of the body, 204 
mode of administration, 204 
features of 

poisoning in living, 232 
poisoning in the dead, 233 
medico-legal aspects of, 230 
accidental poisoning, 230 
homicidal poisoning, 230 
suicidal poisoning, 230 
treatment of, 234 
Deformities, 20 
Delivery, 122 

signs of recent delivery in dead, 123 
signs of recent delivery in the living 
abdomen, 122 
breasts, 122 

general physical state, 122 
lochia, 123 
uterus, 122 

vagina and cervix, 122 
signs of remote delivery in the dead, 123 
signs of remote delivery in the living 
abdomen, 123 


breasts, 123 
vagina, 123 

Detection of crime, difficulties in 
decomposition, 6 
delay in information, 6 
lack of medical knowledge, 6 
rapid disposal of dead bodies, 6 
Dhatura, 299 
fatal dose, 300 
fatal period, 300 
medico-legal significance, 300 
post-mortem appearance, 300 
symptoms, 299 
treatment, 300 
Diamond powder, 283 
Diatom test, 63 
Digitalis purpurea, 311 
fatal dose, 311 
fatal period, 311 
medico-legal significance, 312 
symptoms, 311 
treatment, 311 
DNA fingerprinting 
PCR technique, 168 

laboratory procedure, 168 
principle, 168 
sample collection for, 169 
structure of DNA, 168 
uses of 

developing treatment of genetic disorders, 169 
diagnosis of inherited disorders, 169 
disputed paternity, 169 
maternity testing, 169 
migration of population, 169 
use in crime investigation, 169 
Drowning, 60 

cause of death, 61 

cerebral haemorrhage, 61 
concussion, 61 
exhaustion, 61 
injuries, 61 
syncope, 61 
vagal inhibition, 61 
fatal period, 62 
mechanism of, 61 
medico-legal importance, 63 
post-mortem findings 
external, 62 
internal, 62 


Sharma-lndex.p65 


352 


8/27/07, 11:52 AM 


















Index 353 


symptoms of, 61 
types of, 60 

cold water drowning, 61 
dry drowning, 60 
secondary drowning, 61 
wet drowning, 60 
Dum-Dum bullets, 88 
Dowry death, 102 
Dyadic deaths, 101 

E 

Electricity, 74 

causes of death, 74 
duration, 74 

judicial electrocution, 74 
nature of current, 74 
post-mortem findings 
filigree burns, 75 

Joule burn or endogenous burns, 74 
resistance of body, 74 
symptoms, 74 
treatment, 74 
Elemental mercury, 264 
clinical features, 264 
treatment, 265 
Embalming, 170 
definition, 170 
history, 170 

medico-legal importance, 171 
methods of embalming 
arterial embalming, 171 
cavity embalming, 171 
hypodermic embalming, 171 
surface embalming, 171 
present use, 170 
preservatives used, 170 
principle, 170 
Ergot, 248 

acute poisoning, 248 
chronic poisoning (Ergotism), 248 
fatal dose and fatal period, 248 
medico-legal significance, 249 
symptoms, 248 
treatment, 249 
Ethylene glycol, 271 
clinical features, 272 
fatal dose, 272 
mechanism of action, 272 
treatment, 272 


Euthanasia, 162 
reasons of, 162 

right to commit suicide, 162 
should a person be forced to stay alive, 162 
unbearable pain, 162 
types of, 162 

active euthanasia, 162 
passive euthanasia, 162 
Examination of skeletal remains, 29 
Examination of decomposed bodies, 28 
Examination of mutilated bodies or fragments, 28 
Exhumation, 31 
procedure, 31 
rules, 31 

F 

Fibres, examination of, 37 
Fire-arm, 81 
range of, 82 

smooth bored or shotguns, 81 
Fire-arm injuries, 84 

close-range wounds, 85 
flame and hot gases, 84 
projectile, 84 

post-mortem examination, 89 

soot particles and powder tattooing, 84 

unusual phenomenon, 

Kennedy, 89 
Rayalaseema, 89 
wounds produced 

close-range wounds, 85 
contact wounds, 84 
long or out of range wounds, 86 
short to medium range wounds, 85 
Flash burns, 75 
Fluorine, 243 
fatal dose, 243 
fatal period, 243 
medico-legal significance, 243 
treatment, 243 
Food poisoning, 322 
Forensic medicine, definitions of, 3 
Forensic medicine, history of, 3 
Forensic medicine in India, 4 
Forensic psychiatry 
abreaction, 152 
affect, 152 
amnesia, 152 


Sharma-lndex.p65 


353 


8/27/07, 11:52 AM 


















354 Index 


aphasia, 152 
Binet-Simon test, 152 
circumstantiality, 152 
compulsion, 152A 
delirium, 152 
delusion, 152 
dementia, 154 
erotomania, 152 
fugue state, 152 
hallucination, 153 
illusion, 153 
impulse, 153 
lilliputian, 153 
lucid interval, 153 
mental handicap, 154 
obsession, 154 
phobia, 154 

pseudologia fantastica, 152 
psychopath, 154 
psychosis and neurosis, 154, 155 
synaesthesia, 153 
trichotillomania, 153 
Foul smelling gases, 48 
Friedman test, 121 


G 

Galli Mainini test, 121 
Positive signs of pregnancy 
foetal heart sound, 121 
foetal movement, 121 
sonography, 122 
X-ray examination, 122 
Gastric lavage, 235 
Gettler’s test, 62 
Glasgow coma scale, 234 
Gordon’s classification 
anaemic anoxia, 40 
anoxic anoxia, 40 
histotoxic anoxia, 40 
stagnant anoxia, 40 
Gun powder residue, detection of, 89 
Flarrison and Gilroy test, 89 
modern tests 
FASS, 89 

neutron activation analysis, 89 
SEM-DEX, 89 
paraffin test, 89 
Gutzeit test, 263 


H 

Hair, 18 

medico-legal importance, 18 
Hair and fibre, examination of, 36 
anatomy, 36 
examination, 36 
Halogen poisoning, 242 
Handwriting, 21 
Hanging, 54 

atypical or partial hanging, 54 
cause of death in hanging 
asphyxia, 55 
cereberal ischemia, 55 

combined asphyxia and venous congestion, 55 
fracture or dislocation of cervical vertebrae, 55 
venous congestion, 55 
ligature, 54 
management of, 55 
medico-legal importance, 56 
post-mortem changes, 55 
external examination, 55 
internal examination, 56 
symptoms of, 55 
typical, 54 
Head injury, 103 

meningeal haemorrhages, 

extra-dural haemorrhage, 104 
sub-dural haemorrhage, 105 
scalp injury, 103 
skull fracture 

basilar fracture, 104 
comminuted fracture, 103 
contre-coup fractures, 104 
depressed fracture, 103 
diastatic fracture, 104 
gutter fracture, 104 
linear or fissured fractures, 104 
pond or indented fracture, 104 
ring fracture, 104 
Heat, 67 

effects of, 67 
heat cramps, 68 
heat exhaustion, 67 
heat fatigue, 67 
heatstroke, 67 
heat syncope, 67 
medico-legal importance, 67 
post-mortem findings, 67 
treatment, 68 


Sharma-lndex.p65 


354 


8/27/07, 11:52 AM 


















Index 355 


Heat haematoma, 72 
Heroin, 286 
Honour killings, 101 
Hogben or Xenopus test, 121 
Homicidal or criminal causes, 141 
act of commission, 141 
drowning, 141 
mechanical violence, 142 
poisoning, 142 
strangulation, 141 
suffocation, 141 
act of omission, 142 
relevant legal sections, 142 
Hooch tragedies, 296 
Hydrochloric acid, 239 
fatal dose, 239 
fatal period, 239 
medico-legal significance, 239 
post-mortem appearance, 239 
properties, 239 
special symptoms, 239 
Hymen, types of, 117 
annular, 117 
cribriform, 117 
fimbriated, 117 
imperforate, 117 
septate, 117 
Hypnosis, 161 

I 

Iatrogenic electrocution, 75 
Identification, 11 

complexion and features, 18 
Impotence, 111 

Impotence/Sterility in males, causes of 
age, 111 

congenital malformations, 111 
local trauma or diseases, 111 
psychological, 112 
systemic diseases, 112 
Impotence/Sterility in the female, causes of 
age, 112 

congenital malformations, 112 
local trauma or diseases, 112 
psychological, 112 
systemic diseases, 112 
Incest, 128 
Infanticide, 138 
Inorganic acid poisoning, 237 


local applications, 237 
mechanism of action, 237 
treatment, 237 
Inorganic poisoning, 252 
Inquest, 5 

Coroner’s inquest, 5 
magistrate inquests, 6 
medical examiner system, 6 
police inquest, 5 
Insanity, 150 
causes of, 150 

environmental factors, 150 
heredity, 150 
organic causes, 150 
definition of, 150 
onset of, 150 
Insulin poisoning, 282 
Iodine, 242 

clinical features, 243 
fatal dose, 243 

medico-legal significance, 243 
post-mortem features, 243 
treatment, 243 
Iron, 272 

fatal dose, 272 
fatal period, 272 
medico-legal significance, 273 
post-mortem features, 273 
symptoms, 272 
treatment, 272 

Irritant poisons—animal poisons, 275 
Irritant poisons—non-metallic (Inorganic) 
mechanism of action, 252 

Irritant poisons—metallic poisons (Inorganic), 259 
Isopropanol, 271 

clinical symptoms, 271 
fatal dose, 271 
treatment, 271 

J 

Juar kadvi, 316 

K 

Klinefelter’s syndrome, 12 

L 

Lacerations 
avulsions, 80 
cut laceration, 80 


Sharma-lndex.p65 


355 


8/27/07, 11:52 AM 


















356 Index 


split, 80 

stretch laceration, 80 
tears, 80 
Lead, 268 

acute poisoning 
fatal dose, 269 
fatal period, 269 
sub-acute form, 269 
treatment, 269 

chronic poisoning (plumbism or saturnism), 269 
clinical features, 269 
diagnosis, 270 

post-mortem appearance, 271 
treatment, 270 
Legal procedures, 5 
Legitimacy, 135 

medico-legal aspects of, 135 
disputed paternity, 135 
fictitious child, 135 
inheritance, 135 
medico-legal considerations 
duration of pregnancy, 135 
maximum period of pregnancy, 135 
minimum period of pregnancy, 135 
paternity, 136 
superfecundation, 135 
superfetation, 136 
Lesbianism, 129 
Lightning, 73 
effect of, 73 

medico-legal significance, 73 
Lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD), 304 
clinical features, 305 
fatal dose, 305 
treatment, 305 

M 

Marriage annulment, 136 
adultery, 136 
cruelty, 137 
desertion, 137 
impotence, 136 
wife battery, 137 
Marsh’s test, 263 
McNaughten rule, 160 
Mechanical poisons, 283 
Medical ethics, 184 
Medical evidence, 8 

documentary evidence, 8 


dying declaration, 9 
dying deposition, 9 
medical certificate, 8 
medico-legal reports, 9 
oral evidence, 9 
Medical negligence, 216 
types of, 217 

civil negligence, 217 
criminal negligence, 217 
Medico-legal aspects of sexual offences, 133 
date rape, 133 
false charges, 134 

rape during sleep or unconsciousness, 133 
rape trauma syndrome, 133 
Medico-legal aspects of wounds 
age of injury, 96 
causes of death 
air embolism, 97 

death due to medical intervention, 98 
death due to supervened disease because of 
trauma, 98 
fat embolism, 97 
gangrene, 97 
haemorrhage, 97 
infection, 97 
injury to vital organ, 97 
shock, 97 

thrombosis in veins, 97 
enzyme changes, 98 
medico-legal importance, 99 
Medico-legal issues in AIDS and STD 
legal rights, 133 
medical issue, 132 
social and ethical issues 
absolute privilege, 132 
qualified privilege, 132 
Mental diseases, classification of, 151 
drug dependence, 152 
neurosis, 151 
Personality disorders, 152 
psychosis, 151 

functional psychosis, 151 
organic psychosis, 151 
sexual perversions, 152 
Mercury, 264 

Mercury, inorganic salts of, 265 
chronic poisoning, 266 
clinical features, 265 
fatal dose, 265 


Sharma-lndex.p65 


356 


8/27/07, 11:52 AM 


















Index 357 


fatal period, 265 
laboratory diagnosis, 265 
post-mortem findings, 266 
treatment, 265 

Mercury, organic compounds of, 266 
clinical features, 266 
ethyl mercury, 267 
mercurochrome, 267 
methyl mercury, 266 
phenyl mercury, 267 
treatment, 267 

Methods of identification, miscellaneous, 21 
clothes and personal articles, 21 
gait, 21 

mental power, memory and education, 21 
speech and voice, 21 
ticks, manners and habit, 21 
Methyl alcohol, 295 
antidote, 295 
fatal dose, 295 
fatal period, 295 
mechanism of action, 295 
medico-legal significance, 295 
post-mortem appearance, 295 
symptoms, 295 
treatment, 295 
Morphine, 285 
Mummification, 50 
Mushroom poisoning, 324 
clinical features, 324 

long incubation poisoning, 324 
short incubation poisoning, 324 
medico-legal significance, 325 
structure of a mushroom, 324 
treatment, 325 

N 

Narco-analysis or truth serum test, 222 
Needles and pins, 284 

Nerium odorum (Kaner or White oleander), 312 
fatal dose, 312 
fatal period, 312 
medico-legal significance, 312 
symptoms, 312 
treatment, 312 
Neurosis, 151,155 
anxiety, 155 
depression, 156 
endogenous, 156 


hypochondriacal, 156 
involutional, 156 
puerperal, 156 
reactive, 156 
hysterical, 156 
obsessive-compulsive, 156 
Neurotic poisons—somniferous poisons, 285 
Nitric acid, 239 

chemical properties, 239 
fatal dose, 239 
fatal period, 239 
medico-legal significance, 239 
post-mortem appearance, 239 
special poisoning symptoms, 239 
Non-metallic poisons, 252 

aluminium phosphide poisoning, 256 
fatal dose, 257 
fatal period, 257 
laboratory test, 257 
mechanism of toxicity, 256 
medico-legal significance, 258 
mild poisoning, 257 
moderate poisoning, 257 
post-mortem appearance, 258 
procedure, 257 
severe poisoning, 257 
symptoms, 257 
treatment, 257 

chronic phosphorus poisoning, 253 
medico-legal significance, 254 
treatment, 254 

organophosphorus and carbamates poisoning, 
254 

antidotes, 255 

confirmation test (laboratory methods), 255 
fatal dose, 255 
fatal period, 255 
mechanism of action, 254 
medico-legal importance, 256 
post-mortem appearance, 256 
specific reactivator oximes, 256 
symptoms, 254 
treatment, 255 
phosphorus poisoning, 252 
fatal dose, 253 
fatal period, 253 
liver failure, 253 
mechanism of action, 253 
post-mortem findings, 253 


Sharma-lndex.p65 


357 


8/27/07, 11:52 AM 


















358 Index 


symptoms, 252 
treatment, 253 

pyrethrins and pyrethroids, 258 

O 

Occupational marks, 21 
Opium, 285 

acute poisoning, 286 
codeine, 286 

differential diagnosis, 287 
apoplexy, 287 

acute alcohol poisoning, 287 
barbiturate poisoning, 287 
carbolic acid poisoning, 287 
diabetic coma, 287 
epileptic coma, 287 
head injury, 287 
hysterical coma, 287 
ureamic coma, 287 
fatal dose, 287 
fatal period, 287 
heroin, 286 

medico-legal significance, 288 
morphine, 285 
post-mortem findings, 288 
treatment, 287 
unusual symptoms, 286 
Organic acid poisoning, 239 

P 

Peripheral nerve poisons, 308 
Perjury, 8 

Permanent cessation of circulation and respiration 
diaphanous test, 43 
Icard’s test, 43 
magnus test, 43 
Phencyclidine, 305 
clinical features, 305 
medico-legal significance, 305 
toxic dose, 305 

Plumbago rosea (Lai chitra), 250 
medico-legal significance, 251 
symptoms, 251 
Plumbago zeylanica, 250 
Poisonous food, 323 

Argemone mexicana, 323 
Lathyrus sativus, 323 
Poisonous insects, 281 


ants, 281 
scorpions, 282 
wasp, bees hornets, 281 
Poisons, 229 

Poison Information Centers, 236 
Polygraph or lie detector test, 222 
Post-mortem caloricity, 46 
Post-mortem examination, 22 
alternative way of, 

endoscopic autopsy, 27 
psychological autopsy, 27 
cause of death, 27 
external examination, 23 
internal examination, 24 
examination of head, 24 
examination of thorax and abdomen, 24 
intestines, 25 
liver, 25 

spine and spinal cord, 25 
stomach, 25 
uterus, 25 

preservation of viscera, 26 
Post-mortem staining, 46 
Potassium carbonate, 244 
Potassium hydroxide, 244 
Powdered glass, 283 
fatal dose, 283 
fatal period, 283 
medico-legal significance, 283 
post-mortem appearance, 283 
symptoms, 283 
treatment, 283 
Pregnancy, 122 

medico-legal significance of, 122 
civil cases, 122 
criminal cases, 122 
presumptive signs, 119 

cessation of menstruation, 120 
changes in breasts, 120 
changes in vagina, 120 
frequency of micturition, 120 
morning sickness, 120 
pigmentation of skin, 120 
quickening, 120 
sympathetic changes, 120 
Probable signs, 120 
ballottement, 121 
Braxton Hicks sign, 120 


Sharma-lndex.p65 


358 


8/27/07, 11:52 AM 


















Index 359 


changes in cervix, 120 
endocrine tests, 121 
enlargement of abdomen, 120 

Hegar’s sign, 120 
palpation of foetus, 121 
uterine souffle, 121 

Pregnancy in dead, 122 
signs of, 122 

corpus luteum, 122 

presence of foetus or ovum, 122 

uterine changes, 122 

Pregnancy, medical termination of, 144 
Propellant charge, 83 
black powder, 83 
smokeless powder, 84 
double base powder, 84 
single base powder, 84 
triple base powder, 84 
Pseudohermaphroditism, 13 

Psychosis, 155 

manic-depressive, 155 
depressive phase, 155 
mania phase, 155 
schizophrenia, 155 
catatonic, 155 
hebephrenia, 155 
paranoid schizophrenia, 155 
simple schizophrenia, 155 

fatal dose, 247 
fatal period, 247 
medico-legal significance, 248 
post-mortem appearance, 248 
symptoms, 247 
treatment, 248 

Regional injuries, 103 

Reinsch’s test, 262 

Retained bullets, 88 

Ricochet bullet, 88 

Ricinus communis (Castor oil plant, Arandi), 245 
fatal dose, 245 
fatal period, 245 
medico-legal significance, 246 
post-mortem appearance, 246 
symptoms, 245 
treatment, 246 

Rifled fire-arms, 82 
hand guns, 82 
pistols, 82 
revolvers, 82 
rifles, 82 

Rigor mortis, 47 

cadaveric spasm, 47 
cold stiffening, 47 
heat stiffening, 47 

S 

R 

Salivary stains, examination of, 36 

Scars, 20 

Race, 11 

complexion, 11 
eyes, 11 
hair, 11 
skeleton, 12 

Rape, 124 
age, 125 

custodial rape, 124 
definition, 124 
examination 
clothes, 126 
genitals, 126 
injuries, 126 

examination of victim, 125 
prevalence of rape, 125 
punishment for rape, 124 
socio-economic status, 125 

Rape trauma syndrome, 133 

Abrus precatorious (Ratti ), 247 

Semecarpus anacardium (marking nut tree), 249 
fatal dose, 250 
fatal period, 250 
medico-legal significance, 250 
symptoms, 249 

Seminal stains, examination of, 35 
chemical tests, 35 

acid phosphatase isoenzyme method, 35 
acid phosphatase spot test, 35 

Barberio’s test, 35 
florence test, 35 

LDH isoenzyme method to detect 
spermatozoa, 35 
zinc test, 35 

identification of species, 36 
immunological method, 36 

LDH isoenzyme method, 36 
microscopic method, 36 
individual identification, 36 


Sharma-lndex.p65 


359 


8/27/07, 11:52 AM 


















360 Index 


microscopic examination, 35 
visual examination, 35 
Sex, 12 

clinical method, 12 
investigations 
intersex, 12 

sex chromatin study, 12 
Sexual deviations, 130 
exhibitionism, 130 
fetishism, 130 
frotteurism, 131 
masochism, 130 
necrophilia, 130 
nymphomania, 130 
paedophilia, 130 
sadism, 130 
satyriasis, 131 
scotophilia, 130 
transvestism, 130 
troilism, 130 
undinism, 131 

voyeurism (peeping tom), 130 
Sexual harassment, 131 
criminal proceedings, 131 
definition, 131 
Sexual offences, 124, 133 
Sexually transmitted disease (STD), 127 
Shotguns, wounds produced by 
close range, 87 
contact wounds, 87 
short range to medium range, 88 
Snakes (Ophidia), 276 

non-poisonous snakes, 279 
fatal dose, 279 
first aid, 280 
hospital treatment, 281 
local reaction, 279 
medico-legal significance, 281 
post-mortem appearances, 281 
specific findings in snake bites, 280 
symptoms of snake venom poisoning, 279 
treatment, 280 
poisonous snakes, 276 
banded krait, 277 
black krait, 277 
cobra, 276 
common krait, 277 
king cobra, 277 


viperidae, 277 
snake venom, 278 
Sodium carbonate, 244 
Sodium hydroxide, 244 
Somnambulism, 161 
Spectacle haematoma, 103 
Spinal injuries, 107 

concussion of spine or railway spine, 107 
Hangman’s fracture, 107 
whiplash injury, 107 
Spinal poisons, 306 
Starvation, 65 

acute starvation, 65 
chronic starvation, 65 
clinical features, 65 
medico-legal importance, 66 
post-mortem findings 
external, 66 
internal, 66 
Sterility, 111 

examination of, 111 
Strangulation, 57 
bans-dola, 57 
garroting, 57 

medico-legal importance, 58 
mugging, 57 

post-mortem findings, 57 
external, 57 
internal, 58 
throttling, 57 

Strvchnous nux vomica, 306 
fatal dose, 307 
fatal period, 307 
mechanism of action, 306 
medico-legal significance, 308 
post-mortem findings, 308 
symptoms, 307 
treatment, 307 
Sudden death, 40 
causes, 40 

diseases of alimentary system, 41 
diseases of cardiovascular system, 40 
diseases of central nervous system, 41 
diseases of genitourinary system, 41 
diseases of respiratory system, 40 
systemic diseases, 41 

Sudden infant death syndrome or Cot deaths, 142 
Suffocation, 58 


Sharma-lndex.p65 


360 


8/27/07, 11:52 AM 


















Index 361 


causes, 58 

cafe coronary, 59 
choking, 59 

inhalation of irrespirable gases, 59 
smothering, 58 
traumatic asphyxia, 59 
medico-legal importance, 60 
post-mortem findings 
external, 60 
internal, 60 

Sulphuric acid (H 2 S0 4 ), 238 
fatal dose, 238 
fatal period, 238 
medico-legal significance, 238 
post-mortem appearance, 238 
special symptoms, 238 
vitriolage (Acid throwing), 238 

T 

Tandem bullet, 88 
Tattoo marks, 20 

Test tube baby or in vitro fertilisation, 114 
medico-legal issues, 114 
surrogate mother, 114 
Thallium, 273 
fatal dose, 273 
fatal period, 273 
mechanism of action, 273 
medico-legal points, 274 
post-mortem appearance, 274 
symptoms, 273 
treatment, 273 
Time since death, 51 
Tobacco (Nicotiana tabacum), 310 
acute poisoning, 310 
chronic poisoning, 311 
fatal dose, 310 
fatal period, 310 
medico-legal significance, 311 
treatment, 311 
Torture, 163 

methods of, 163 

physical torture, 163 
psychological torture, 164 
sexual torture, 164 
Traffic injuries, 109 
injuries to driver, 109 


injuries to non-driver occupants, 109 
injuries to pedestrians, 109 
crush injuries, 109 
primary impact injuries, 109 
secondary impact injuries, 109 
secondary injuries, 109 
injuries to two wheeler drivers, 110 
True hermaphroditism, 13 
Turner’s syndrome, 13 

U 

Unabsorbed poison, 234 
Unnatural sexual offences, 128 
classification, 129 
bestiality, 129 
buccal coitus, 129 
sodomy, 129 
incidence, 128 

y 

Vegetable hairs, 284 
Vegetable poisons, 245 
Virginity, 117 

medico-legal aspects, 119 
signs of, 117 
breasts, 119 
genitalia, 117 
Voice stress test, 223 

W 

War gases, 320 
asphyxiants, 320 
nasal irritants, 321 
nerve gases, 321 
paralysants, 321 
tear gases, 320 
vesicating agents, 320 
Witness, types of, 10 
common, 10 
expert, 10 

Workmen’s Compensation Act, 1923, 171 
Wounds, 79 

incised wound, 79 
lacerated wounds, 80 
stab or punctured wounds, 79 
Writing analysis or graphology, 223 


Sharma-lndex.p65 


361 


8/27/07, 11:52 AM 


















Concise Textbook of 3 rd 

Forensic Medicine & Toxicology 


The present book is a thoroughly revised and updated version of the earlier edition. It is designed to suit 
an undergraduate student’s need of quick study of the subject while preparing for examinations. The 
text faithfully follows the curriculum prescribed by the Medical Council of India. 

Key Features 

• Includes contemporary developments like cloning, euthanasia, date rape and drag facilitated sexual 
assaults. 

• Toxicology is discussed as per standard clinical practice. 

• Chapters on medical negligence include concepts like comparative negligence and post-CPA 
scenario in medical practice. 

• The chapter sequence is designed as per the teaching schedule in medical colleges. 

• Incorporated detailed discussion vis-a-vis related legal provision in a systematic manner. 

• Text is illustrated with photographs, line drawings, sketches and tables. 

NEW TO THIS EDITION 

• Chapter, Recent Advances in Crime Detection featuring new concepts like lie detector test, narco¬ 
analysis, brain mapping, hypnosis and voice stress test. 

• Updation of chapters. Insanity and Forensic Psychiatry and Sexual Offences. 

• Thorough revision of topics like collection of samples for DNA fingerprinting in living and dead 
cases. 

• Line diagrams in some chapters and photographs (forensic slides) at the end of Section I: Forensic 
Medicine for better appreciation of concepts. 

• Tables in various chapters for greater understanding and quick recapitulation during examination. 

• Appendix highlighting characteristics of some toxic agents for usefulness in toxicology. 

This comprehensive, yet concise textbook is ideal for undergraduate students of Forensic Medicine. It 
would also be useful for students of Ayurvedic, Homoeopathic, Unami and Siddha systems of medicine. 


About the Author 

Dr R K Sharma joined All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi in 1977 as under¬ 
graduate student. Later after completion of his post-graduation in Forensic Medicine, he 
joined as faculty member. He served as Head of the department and later took voluntary I 
retirement to pursue his medico-legal goals. He is examiner to various universities in India. He 
has authored more than 65 international papers. He has written five books and publishes five 
international journals. He has supervised many scientific projects of national and international 
importance. He is currently working as Dean (R & D), Saraswathi Institute of Medical Sciences, 
Hapur, Uttar Pradesh. 

He can be contacted at rksharmal@gmail.com and his mobile number is 0091-9891098542. 


ISBN 978-81-921050-0-01 


788192 


105000 
